# Source data for the Marx's Ghost mechanic (see marx.twee).
# One quote per line. Blank lines and lines starting with # are ignored.
# Public domain (Marx died 1883). Source: marxists.org, Capital Vol. 1.
#
# GENERATED FILE -- do not hand-edit. Produced by
# story/shared/marx-corpus/extract_quotes.py from capital-vol1.txt.
# To change the quote pool, edit the corpus or the filters in that
# script and rerun it (see story/shared/marx-corpus/fetch_and_clean.py
# and extract_quotes.py for the full pipeline).

The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as “an immense accumulation of commodities,” its unit being a single commodity.
Our investigation must therefore begin with the analysis of a commodity.
A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another.
The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no difference.
Neither are we here concerned to know how the object satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production.
It is an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways.
To discover the various uses of things is the work of history.
So also is the establishment of socially-recognized standards of measure for the quantities of these useful objects.
The diversity of these measures has its origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention.
The utility of a thing makes it a use value.
But this utility is not a thing of air.
Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity.
A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use value, something useful.
This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities.
When treating of use value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron.
The use values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities.
Use values become a reality only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth.
In the form of society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of exchange value.
Hence exchange value appears to be something accidental and purely relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.
Let us consider the matter a little more closely.
Instead of one exchange value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many.
But since x blacking, y silk, or z gold &c.
Therefore, first: the valid exchange values of a given commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange value, generally, is only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it.
The proportions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e.
It tells us that in two different things – in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt.
The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is neither the one nor the other.
Each of them, so far as it is exchange value, must therefore be reducible to this third.
A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear.
In order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles.
But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base multiplied by the altitude.
In the same way the exchange values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity.
This common “something” cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities.
Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them use values.
But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from use value.
Then one use value is just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient quantity.
“one sort of wares are as good as another, if the values be equal.
An hundred pounds’ worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one hundred pounds’ worth of silver or gold.
As use values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as exchange values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom of use value.
If then we leave out of consideration the use value of commodities, they have only one common property left, that of being products of labour.
But even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in our hands.
Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight.
Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive labour.
All that these things now tell us is, that human labour power has been expended in their production, that human labour is embodied in them.
When looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them all, they are – Values.
We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange value manifests itself as something totally independent of their use value.
But if we abstract from their use value, there remains their Value as defined above.
Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the exchange value of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value.
The progress of our investigation will show that exchange value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed.
For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value independently of this, its form.
A use value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it.
How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured?
Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article.
The quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration, and labour time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours.
The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform labour power.
The labour time socially necessary is that required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time.
The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth.
We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour time socially necessary for its production.
Each individual commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class.
Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced in the same time, have the same value.
The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour time necessary for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the other.
“As values, all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour time.
The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour time required for its production also remained constant.
But the latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour.
For example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfavourable, only in four.
The same labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines.
Diamonds are of very rare occurrence on the earth’s surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an average, a great deal of labour time.
Consequently much labour is represented in a small compass.
Jacob doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at its full value.
With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall.
If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks.
The value of a commodity, therefore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the productiveness, of the labour incorporated in it.
A thing can be a use value, without having value.
This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour.
Such are air, virgin soil, natural meadows, &c.
A thing can be useful, and the product of human labour, without being a commodity.
Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use values, but not commodities.
In order to produce the latter, he must not only produce use values, but use values for others, social use values.
The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson.
But neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had been produced for others.
To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it will serve as a use value, by means of an exchange.
If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value.
At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two things – use value and exchange value.
I was the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature of the labour contained in commodities.
As this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of political economy turns, we must go more into detail.
The coat is a use value that satisfies a particular want.
Its existence is the result of a special sort of productive activity, the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and result.
The labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its product, or which manifests itself by making its product a use value, we call useful labour.
In this connection we consider only its useful effect.
As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use values, so also are the two forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and weaving.
Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not produced respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each other in the relation of commodities.
Coats are not exchanged for coats, one use value is not exchanged for another of the same kind.
This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of commodities, but it does not follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the division of labour.
In the primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without production of commodities.
Or, to take an example nearer home, in every factory the labour is divided according to a system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual products.
Only such products can become commodities with regard to each other, as result from different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independently and for the account of private individuals.
To resume, then: In the use value of each commodity there is contained useful labour, i.
Use values cannot confront each other as commodities, unless the useful labour embodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them.
In a community, the produce of which in general takes the form of commodities, i.
Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in either case it operates as a use value.
Nor is the relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour.
Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man becoming a tailor.
If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a material substratum is always left, which is furnished by Nature without the help of man.
The latter can work only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter.
Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by natural forces.
We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of use values produced by labour.
As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the earth its mother.
Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use value to the value of commodities.
By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen.
But this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the present does not concern us.
So far as they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objective expressions of essentially identical labour.
But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour.
This change may possibly not take place without friction, but take place it must.
Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz.
Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively different productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour.
They are but two different modes of expending human labour power.
Of course, this labour power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes.
But the value of a commodity represents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human labour in general.
And just as in society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, so here with mere human labour.
It is the expenditure of simple labour power, i.
Simple average labour, it is true, varies in character in different countries and at different times, but in a particular society it is given.
Skilled labour counts only as simple labour intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour.
Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made.
A commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone.
For simplicity’s sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction.
Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen.
While, therefore, with reference to use value, the labour contained in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human labour pure and simple.
In the former case, it is a question of How and What, in the latter of How much?
Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents only the quantity of labour embodied in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal in value.
If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their number.
If one coat represents x days’ labour, two coats represent 2x days’ labour, and so on.
But assume that the duration of the labour necessary for the production of a coat becomes doubled or halved.
But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered.
An increase in the quantity of use values is an increase of material wealth.
With two coats two men can be clothed, with one coat only one man.
Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may correspond to a simultaneous fall in the magnitude of its value.
This antagonistic movement has its origin in the two-fold character of labour.
Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of some useful concrete form, the efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being dependent on its productiveness.
Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less abundant source of products, in proportion to the rise or fall of its productiveness.
On the other hand, no change in this productiveness affects the labour represented by value.
However then productive power may vary, the same labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts of value.
But it will yield, during equal periods of time, different quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise, fewer, if it fall.
On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure of human labour power, and in its character of identical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities.
On the other hand, all labour is the expenditure of human labour power in a special form and with a definite aim, and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces use values.
Commodities come into the world in the shape of use values, articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c.
They are, however, commodities, only because they are something two-fold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories of value.
They manifest themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of commodities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical or natural form, and a value form.
The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame Quickly, that we don’t know “where to have it.
Turn and examine a single commodity, by itself, as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it.
In fact we started from exchange value, or the exchange relation of commodities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it.
We must now return to this form under which value first appeared to us.
Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use values.
By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented by money.
The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commodity to some one other commodity of a different kind.
Hence the relation between the values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest expression of the value of a single commodity.
The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary form.
Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts.
The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the material in which that value is expressed.
The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part.
The value of the linen is represented as relative value, or appears in relative form.
The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in equivalent form.
The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, antagonistic extremes – i.
They are allotted respectively to the two different commodities brought into relation by that expression.
It is not possible to express the value of linen in linen.
The value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively – i.
The relative form of the value of the linen presupposes, therefore, the presence of some other commodity – here the coat – under the form of an equivalent.
On the other hand, the commodity that figures as the equivalent cannot at the same time assume the relative form.
That second commodity is not the one whose value is expressed.
Its function is merely to serve as the material in which the value of the first commodity is expressed.
A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, in the same expression of value, both forms.
The very polarity of these forms makes them mutually exclusive.
It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be compared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit.
It is only as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensurable.
Linen = coat is the basis of the equation.
But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do not play the same part.
It is only the value of the linen that is expressed.
By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as something that can be exchanged for it.
In this relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value embodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen.
To borrow an illustration from chemistry, butyric acid is a different substance from propyl formate.
Therefore, by thus equating the two substances, expression would be given to their chemical composition, while their different physical forms would be neglected.
It is otherwise in the value relation of one commodity to another.
Here, the one stands forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to the other.
By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour embodied in the former to that in the latter.
Now, it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort from the weaving which makes the linen.
But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring to that which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour.
In this roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring, and, consequently, is abstract human labour.
There is, however, something else required beyond the expression of the specific character of the labour of which the value of the linen consists.
Human labour power in motion, or human labour, creates value, but is not itself value.
It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some object.
When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, as something of the same kind, because it is value.
In this position it is a thing in which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents value.
Yet the coat itself, the body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use value.
A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does the first piece of linen we take hold of.
In the production of the coat, human labour power, in the shape of tailoring, must have been actually expended.
In this aspect the coat is a depository of value, but though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through.
And as equivalent of the linen in the value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that is value.
Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equivalent of the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value.
The value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat, the value of one by the use value of the other.
As a use value, the linen is something palpably different from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the appearance of a coat.
Thus the linen acquires a value form different from its physical form.
The fact that it is value, is made manifest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep’s nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb of God.
We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commodities has already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon as it comes into communication with another commodity, the coat.
Only it betrays its thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the language of commodities.
We may here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Hebrew, many other more or less correct dialects.
The value of A, thus expressed in the use value of B, has taken the form of relative value.
And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite quantity of human labour.
The value form must therefore not only express value generally, but also value in definite quantity.
We have now to consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect of the relative expression of value.
Let the value of the linen vary, that of the coat remaining constant.
If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing soil, the labour time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled.
If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour time be reduced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half.
Consequently, we should have 20 yards of linen = ½ coat.
Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the coat varies.
If we compare the different cases in I and II, we see that the same change of magnitude in relative value may arise from totally opposite causes.
Let the quantities of labour time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat vary simultaneously in the same direction and in the same proportion.
Their change of value is seen as soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose value has remained constant.
If the values of all commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their relative values would remain unaltered.
Their real change of value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of commodities produced in a given time.
The effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I, II, and III.
Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither unequivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value.
The relative value of a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant.
Its relative value may remain constant, although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in amount.
The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the coat, without having assumed a value form different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen.
The fact that the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly exchangeable with it.
Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly exchangeable with other commodities.
The value of the linen being given in magnitude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat.
For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth – what?
Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express the quantity of their own value.
The truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative determination of its value is expressed.
The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the equivalent, is this: use value becomes the form of manifestation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value.
The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value form.
One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material substances, as use values, will serve to illustrate this point.
A sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can neither see nor touch this weight.
We then take various pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined beforehand.
The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf.
Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar-loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with the iron.
In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing nothing but weight.
A certain quantity of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of weight.
This part is played by the iron only within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be determined, enters with the iron.
Were they not both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other.
When we throw both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper proportions, they have the same weight.
With the equivalent form it is just the contrary.
The very essence of this form is that the material commodity itself – the coat – just as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value by Nature itself.
Of course this holds good only so long as the value relation exists, in which the coat stands in the position of equivalent to the linen.
Hence the enigmatical character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money.
The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour.
This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labour.
In order to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour generally.
In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour power is expended.
Both, therefore, possess the general property of being human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of value, have to be considered under this aspect alone.
But in the expression of value there is a complete turn of the tables.
Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete labour (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving.
Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour generally.
Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that concrete labour becomes the form under which its opposite, abstract human labour, manifests itself.
Consequently, although, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character.
This is the reason why it results in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities.
We have then a third peculiarity of the equivalent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the form of its opposite, labour directly social in its form.
In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money form of commodities is only the further development of the simple form of value – i.
“Exchange,” he says, “cannot take place without equality, and equality not without commensurability.
Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further analysis of the form of value.
“It is, however, in reality, impossible (τῇ μὲν οὖν ἀληθείᾳ ἀδύνατον), that such unlike things can be commensurable” – i.
Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to their real nature, consequently only “a makeshift for practical purposes.
Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value.
What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house?
Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle.
Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents what is really equal, both in the beds and the house.
Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis, the inequality of men and of their labour powers.
The brilliancy of Aristotle’s genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality.
The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, “in truth,” was at the bottom of this equality.
The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the equation, expressing its value relation to another commodity of a different kind, or in its exchange relation to the same.
The value of commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it.
Its value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a definite quantity of A.
In other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent and definite expression, by taking the form of exchange value.
When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in common parlance, that a commodity is both a use value and an exchange value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong.
A commodity is a use value or object of utility, and a value.
It manifests itself as this two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form – viz.
It never assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value or exchange relation with another commodity of a different kind.
When once we know this, such a mode of expression does no harm; it simply serves as an abbreviation.
This, however, is the delusion as well of the mercantilists and their recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh, and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade, such as Bastiat.
The mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and consequently on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full perfection in money.
The modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value.
For them there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange relation of commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current.
Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened Free-trade bagmen.
Hence the elementary form of value of a commodity is the elementary form in which the contrast contained in that commodity, between use value and value, becomes apparent.
Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society’s development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz.
We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of value: it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series of metamorphoses before it can ripen into the price form.
To the elementary relative value form of a commodity, there corresponds the single equivalent form of one other commodity.
Thus, in the relative expression of value of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equivalent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation to a single commodity, the linen.
Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transition into a more complete form.
It is true that by means of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity.
But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or anything else.
Therefore, according as A is placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and the same commodity, different elementary expressions of value.
The number of such possible expressions is limited only by the number of the different kinds of commodities distinct from it.
The isolated expression of A’s value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged to any length, of the different elementary expressions of that value.
The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now expressed in terms of numberless other elements of the world of commodities.
Every other commodity now becomes a mirror of the linen’s value.
It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of undifferentiated human labour.
For the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, whether tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c.
The linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but with the whole world of commodities.
As a commodity, it is a citizen of that world.
In the second form, on the contrary, we perceive at once the background that determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental appearance.
The value of the linen remains unaltered in magnitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in numberless different commodities, the property of as many different owners.
The accidental relation between two individual commodity-owners disappears.
It becomes plain, that it is not the exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value which controls their exchange proportions.
Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c.
The bodily form of each of these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many.
In the same way the manifold concrete useful kinds of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of the realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour.
In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete because the series representing it is interminable.
In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent expressions of value.
The defects of the expanded relative value form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form.
Since the bodily form of each single commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding the others.
The latter, indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its manifold, particular, concrete forms.
But, in that case, its expression in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity.
This form of value is elementary and the same for all, therefore general.
The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron.
But to be equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are linen and iron.
This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the first beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodities by accidental and occasional exchanges.
On the other hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly excluded; for, in the equation of value of each commodity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of equivalents.
The expanded form of value comes into actual existence for the first time so soon as a particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer exceptionally, but habitually, exchanged for various other commodities.
By this form, commodities are, for the first time, effectively brought into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange values.
The two earlier forms either express the value of each commodity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in a series of many such commodities.
In both cases, it is, so to say, the special business of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and this it does without the help of the others.
These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts of equivalents.
The general form of value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone.
A commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow suit.
All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values whose magnitudes are capable of comparison.
By expressing the magnitudes of their values in one and the same material, the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other.
The bodily form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the values of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them.
The substance linen becomes the visible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human labour.
Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individuals producing a particular article, linen, acquires in consequence a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds of labour.
The general value form is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their common character of being human labour generally, of being the expenditure of human labour power.
The general value form, which represents all products of labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human labour, shows by its very structure that it is the social resumé of the world of commodities.
That form consequently makes it indisputably evident that in the world of commodities the character possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its specific social character.
The degree of development of the relative form of value corresponds to that of the equivalent form.
But we must bear in mind that the development of the latter is only the expression and result of the development of the former.
The primary or isolated relative form of value of one commodity converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent.
The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other commodities with the character of particular equivalents differing in kind.
And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the character of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the material in which they uniformly express their value.
The antagonism between the relative form of value and the equivalent form, the two poles of the value form, is developed concurrently with that form itself.
The first form, 20 yds of linen = one coat, already contains this antagonism, without as yet fixing it.
According as we read this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the coat are different.
In the one case the relative value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen.
In this first form of value, therefore, it is difficult to grasp the polar contrast.
A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to have acquired the character of direct exchangeability with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this character is denied to every other commodity.
The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other hand, excluded from the relative value form.
If the linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own equivalent.
In order to express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse the form C.
This equivalent has no relative form of value in common with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed by a never ending series of other commodities.
Thus, the expanded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative value for the equivalent commodity.
The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general.
It can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity.
The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equivalent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the money commodity, or serves as money.
It becomes the special social function of that commodity, and consequently its social monopoly, to play within the world of commodities the part of the universal equivalent.
In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the changes are fundamental.
On the other hand, there is no difference between forms C and D, except that, in the latter, gold has assumed the equivalent form in the place of linen.
Gold is in form D, what linen was in form C – the universal equivalent.
Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because it was previously, with reference to them, a simple commodity.
Like all other commodities, it was also capable of serving as an equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of others.
Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal equivalent.
The elementary expression of the relative value of a single commodity, such as linen, in terms of the commodity, such as gold, that plays the part of money, is the price form of that commodity.
The difficulty in forming a concept of the money form, consists in clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form C.
The simple commodity form is therefore the germ of the money form.
A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood.
Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties.
It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, changes the forms of the materials furnished by Nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him.
The form of wood, for instance, is altered, by making a table out of it.
Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood.
But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into something transcendent.
The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use value.
Just as little does it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value.
And lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form.
Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities?
This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses.
In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself.
But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the external object to the eye.
There is a physical relation between physical things.
There it is a definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things.
In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world.
In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one another and the human race.
So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men’s hands.
This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities.
This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces them.
As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of private individuals or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other.
The sum total of the labour of all these private individuals forms the aggregate labour of society.
Since the producers do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific social character of each producer’s labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange.
It is only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their varied forms of existence as objects of utility.
From this moment the labour of the individual producer acquires socially a two-fold character.
The equalisation of the most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common denominator, viz.
Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each other as values, it is not because we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour.
Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them.
We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it.
Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is.
It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic.
The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we are dealing, viz.
What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they make an exchange, is the question, how much of some other product they get for their own?
The character of having value, when once impressed upon products, obtains fixity only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as quantities of value.
These quantities vary continually, independently of the will, foresight and action of the producers.
To them, their own social action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them.
Because, in the midst of all the accidental and ever fluctuating exchange relations between the products, the labour time socially necessary for their production forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature.
The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears.
The determination of the magnitude of value by labour time is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the relative values of commodities.
Its discovery, while removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of the magnitude of the values of products, yet in no way alters the mode in which that determination takes place.
Man’s reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, also, his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly opposite to that of their actual historical development.
He begins, post festum, with the results of the process of development ready to hand before him.
It is, however, just this ultimate money form of the world of commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social character of private labour, and the social relations between the individual producers.
When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human labour, the absurdity of the statement is self-evident.
The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms.
They are forms of thought expressing with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production, viz.
Since Robinson Crusoe’s experiences are a favourite theme with political economists, let us take a look at him on his island.
Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and must therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting.
Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon them as so much recreation.
Necessity itself compels him to apportion his time accurately between his different kinds of work.
Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his general activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, to be overcome in attaining the useful effect aimed at.
This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, and having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books.
All the relations between Robinson and the objects that form this wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, even to Mr.
And yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination of value.
Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson’s island bathed in light to the European middle ages shrouded in darkness.
Here, instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy.
Personal dependence here characterises the social relations of production just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that production.
But for the very reason that personal dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity for labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different from their reality.
They take the shape, in the transactions of society, of services in kind and payments in kind.
Here the particular and natural form of labour, and not, as in a society based on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the immediate social form of labour.
The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his blessing.
We have one close at hand in the patriarchal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn, cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home use.
These different articles are, as regards the family, so many products of its labour, but as between themselves, they are not commodities.
All the characteristics of Robinson’s labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual.
Everything produced by him was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore simply an object of use for himself.
The total product of our community is a social product.
One portion serves as fresh means of production and remains social.
But another portion is consumed by the members as means of subsistence.
A distribution of this portion amongst them is consequently necessary.
The mode of this distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the community, and the degree of historical development attained by the producers.
We will assume, but merely for the sake of a parallel with the production of commodities, that the share of each individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined by his labour time.
Labour time would, in that case, play a double part.
Its apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion between the different kinds of work to be done and the various wants of the community.
The religious world is but the reflex of the real world.
Trading nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient world only in its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores of Polish society.
Those ancient social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and transparent.
This narrowness is reflected in the ancient worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular religions.
This, however, demands for society a certain material ground-work or set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the spontaneous product of a long and painful process of development.
Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incompletely, value and its magnitude, and has discovered what lies beneath these forms.
But it has never once asked the question why labour is represented by the value of its product and labour time by the magnitude of that value.
Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions.
Since exchange value is a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange.
The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production.
It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as now-a-days.
Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy to be seen through.
But when we come to more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes.
Whence arose the illusions of the monetary system?
To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation between producers, but were natural objects with strange social properties.
And modern economy, which looks down with such disdain on the monetary system, does not its superstition come out as clear as noon-day, whenever it treats of capital?
How long is it since economy discarded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society?
But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet another example relating to the commodity form.
Could commodities themselves speak, they would say: Our use value may be a thing that interests men.
It is no part of us as objects.
What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value.
In the eyes of each other we are nothing but exchange values.
Now listen how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist.
Value, in this sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not.
So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange value either in a pearl or a diamond.
Who fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, “To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature.
It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make exchanges of their own account.
We must, therefore, have recourse to their guardians, who are also their owners.
Commodities are things, and therefore without power of resistance against man.
If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in other words, he can take possession of them.
They must therefore, mutually recognise in each other the rights of private proprietors.
It is this economic relation that determines the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act.
The persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and, therefore.
In the course of our investigation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic relations that exist between them.
What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the fact, that it looks upon every other commodity as but the form of appearance of its own value.
A born leveller and a cynic, it is always ready to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and every other commodity, be the same more repulsive than Maritornes herself.
The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity of a sense of the concrete, by his own five and more senses.
His commodity possesses for himself no immediate use-value.
Otherwise, he would not bring it to the market.
It has use-value for others; but for himself its only direct use-value is that of being a depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of exchange.
Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for commodities whose value in use is of service to him.
All commodities are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their non-owners.
But this change of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter puts them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as values.
Hence commodities must be realised as values before they can be realised as use-values.
On the other hand, they must show that they are use-values before they can be realised as values.
For the labour spent upon them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that is useful for others.
Whether that labour is useful for others, and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of others, can be proved only by the act of exchange.
Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange only for those commodities whose use-value satisfies some want of his.
Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private transaction.
From this point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of a general character.
But one and the same set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for all owners of commodities both exclusively private and exclusively social and general.
Let us look at the matter a little closer.
To the owner of a commodity, every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is the universal equivalent for all the others.
So far, therefore, they do not confront each other as commodities, but only as products or use-values.
In their difficulties our commodity owners think like Faust: “Im Anfang war die Tat.
Instinctively they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities.
They cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, and therefore as commodities, except by comparing them with some one other commodity as the universal equivalent.
That we saw from the analysis of a commodity.
But a particular commodity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a social act.
The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets apart the particular commodity in which they all represent their values.
Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the form of the socially recognised universal equivalent.
To be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest.
“Illi unum consilium habent et virtutem et potestatem suam bestiae tradunt.
Et ne quis possit emere aut vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestiae aut numerum nominis ejus.
Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically equated to one another and thus by practice converted into commodities.
The historical progress and extension of exchanges develops the contrast, latent in commodities, between use-value and value.
At the same rate, then, as the conversion of products into commodities is being accomplished, so also is the conversion of one special commodity into money.
The direct barter of products attains the elementary form of the relative expression of value in one respect, but not in another.
That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B.
The form of direct barter is x use-value A = y use-value B.
Objects in themselves are external to man, and consequently alienable by him.
In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by implication as independent individuals.
The exchange of commodities, therefore, first begins on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact with other similar communities, or with members of the latter.
So soon, however, as products once become commodities in the external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse.
The proportions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance.
What makes them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alienate them.
Meantime the need for foreign objects of utility gradually establishes itself.
The constant repetition of exchange makes it a normal social act.
In the course of time, therefore, some portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with a special view to exchange.
From that moment the distinction becomes firmly established between the utility of an object for the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of exchange.
On the other hand, the quantitative proportion in which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their production itself.
Custom stamps them as values with definite magnitudes.
At this stage, therefore, the articles exchanged do not acquire a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the individual needs of the exchangers.
The necessity for a value-form grows with the increasing number and variety of the commodities exchanged.
The problem and the means of solution arise simultaneously.
Such last-mentioned article, by becoming the equivalent of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within narrow limits, the character of a general social equivalent.
This character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that called it into life.
In turns and transiently it attaches itself first to this and then to that commodity.
But with the development of exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts of commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the money-form.
The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks is at first a matter of accident.
Nevertheless there are two circumstances whose influence is decisive.
Man has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve as the primitive material of money, but has never used land for that purpose.
Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois society already well developed.
It dates from the last third of the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice on a national scale was made a century afterwards, during the French bourgeois revolution.
An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal human labour, that material alone can be whose every sample exhibits the same uniform qualities.
Gold and silver possess these properties by Nature.
In addition to its special use-value as a commodity (gold, for instance, serving to stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, &c.
Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of money, the latter being their universal equivalent, they, with regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts of particular commodities.
We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown upon one single commodity, of the value relations between all the rest.
That money is a commodity is therefore a new discovery only for those who, when they analyse it, start from its fully developed shape.
The act of exchange gives to the commodity converted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form.
By confounding these two distinct things some writers have been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary.
The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion, that it is itself a mere symbol.
Nevertheless under this error lurked a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an inseparable part of that object, but is simply the form under which certain social relations manifest themselves.
In this sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it.
This suited the mode of explanation in favour during the 18th century.
Unable to account for the origin of the puzzling forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people sought to denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing to them a conventional origin.
It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form of a commodity does not imply the determination of the magnitude of its value.
Therefore, although we may be aware that gold is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs.
Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the magnitude of its value except relatively in other commodities.
This value is determined by the labour-time required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that costs the same amount of labour-time.
Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes place at the source of its production by means of barter.
When it steps into circulation as money, its value is already given.
In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money is a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis.
The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a commodity becomes money.
The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the result and leave no trace behind.
Commodities find their own value already completely represented, without any initiative on their part, in another commodity existing in company with them.
These objects, gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all human labour.
In the form of society now under consideration, the behaviour of men in the social process of production is purely atomic.
Hence their relations to each other in production assume a material character independent of their control and conscious individual action.
These facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form of commodities.
We have seen how the progressive development of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged commodity with the character of money.
Hence the riddle presented by money is but the riddle presented by commodities; only it now strikes us in its most glaring form.
Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, gold as the money-commodity.
The first chief function of money is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their values, or to represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and quantitatively comparable.
It thus serves as a universal measure of value.
And only by virtue of this function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, become money.
It is not money that renders commodities commensurable.
Money as a measure of value, is the phenomenal form that must of necessity be assumed by that measure of value which is immanent in commodities, labour-time.
The expression of the value of a commodity in gold — x commodity A = y money-commodity — is its money-form or price.
The general form of relative value has resumed its original shape of simple or isolated relative value.
On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form peculiar to the relative value of the money-commodity.
The series itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices of actual commodities.
We have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of money expressed in all sorts of commodities.
In order to put it on an equal footing with all other commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to itself as its own equivalent.
The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form of value generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable bodily form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form.
Their owner must, therefore, lend them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communicated to the outside world.
Since the expression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for this purpose imaginary or ideal money.
When, therefore, money serves as a measure of value, it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money.
This circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories.
But, although the money that performs the functions of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely upon the actual substance that is money.
If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and silver, are simultaneously measures of value, all commodities have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price.
The values of these commodities are, therefore, changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold.
Hence, in spite of the confusing variety of the commodities themselves, their values become magnitudes of the same denomination, gold-magnitudes.
They are now capable of being compared with each other and measured, and the want becomes technically felt of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit measure.
This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, becomes itself the standard or scale.
It is owing to this that, in all metallic currencies, the names given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight.
As measure of Value, and as standard of price, money has two entirely distinct functions to perform.
It is the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human labour; it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal.
As the measure of value it serves to convert the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quantities of gold; as the standard of price it measures those quantities of gold.
In order to make gold a standard of price, a certain weight must be fixed upon as the unit.
In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of measure is all-important.
Hence, the less the unit is subject to variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its office.
But only in so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure of value.
It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of price.
No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of different quantities of the metal remain constant.
Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts.
Thus gold always renders the same service as an invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary.
In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not interfere with its functions as a measure of value.
The change affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris paribus, leaves their relative values inter se, unaltered, although those values are now expressed in higher or lower gold-prices.
As regards the fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws of elementary relative value investigated in a former chapter.
Such change of price holds good only in the case of commodities whose value remains constant.
With those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously with, and proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price.
Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form.
By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current money-names of the various weights of the precious metal figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names originally represented.
This discrepancy is the result of historical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation of foreign money into an imperfectly developed community.
This happened in Rome in its early days, where gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodities.
The names of these foreign coins never coincide with those of the indigenous weights.
The word pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver.
The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes differentiated from the same word as a weight-name.
These historical causes convert the separation of the money-name from the weight-name into an established habit with the community.
Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely conventional, and must on the other hand find general acceptance, it is in the end regulated by law.
A given weight of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially divided into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, &c.
These aliquot parts, which thenceforth serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot parts with legal names, such as shilling, penny, &c.
But, both before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of metal is the standard of metallic money.
The sole alteration consists in the subdivision and denomination.
In this way commodities express by their prices how much they are worth, and money serves as money of account whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form.
The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities of that thing.
I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his name is Jacob.
In the same way with regard to money, every trace of a value-relation disappears in the names pound, dollar, franc, ducat, &c.
Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity.
This circumstance depends, neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners of other commodities.
Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it expresses the connexion that necessarily exists between a certain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society required to produce it.
As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a more or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity and another, the money-commodity.
But this exchange-ratio may express either the real magnitude of that commodity’s value, or the quantity of gold deviating from that value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be parted with.
The possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magnitude of value, or the deviation of the former from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself.
This is no defect, but, on the contrary, admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production whose inherent laws impose themselves only as the mean of apparently lawless irregularities that compensate one another.
The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude of value and price, i.
Objects that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, &c.
Hence an object may have a price without having value.
The price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathematics.
Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a commodity (e.
But it by no means states the converse, that iron is directly exchangeable for gold.
To fix its price, it suffices to equate it to gold in imagination.
But to enable it to render to its owner the service of a universal equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold.
“Assai bene è trascorsa d’esta moneta già la lega e ’l peso, ma dimmi se tu l’hai ne la tua borsa.
A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchangeable for money, and also that it must be so exchanged.
On the other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in the process of exchange, established itself as the money-commodity.
Under the ideal measure of values there lurks the hard cash.
We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodities implies contradictory and mutually exclusive conditions.
The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money does not sweep away these inconsistencies, but develops a modus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side.
This is generally the way in which real contradictions are reconciled.
For instance, it is a contradiction to depict one body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the same time, constantly flying away from it.
The ellipse is a form of motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same time reconciles it.
In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are transferred from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation of matter.
The product of one form of useful labour replaces that of another.
When once a commodity has found a resting-place, where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of exchange into that of consumption.
But the former sphere alone interests us at present.
We have, therefore, now to consider exchange from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of commodities which effectuates the social circulation of matter.
The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very imperfect.
The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indistinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a commodity results from the exchange of two commodities, an ordinary one and the money-commodity.
We overlook the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and that when other commodities express their prices in gold, this gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves.
Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as they are.
The process then differentiates them into commodities and money, and thus produces an external opposition corresponding to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use-values and values.
Commodities as use-values now stand opposed to money as exchange-value.
On the other hand, both opposing sides are commodities, unities of use-value and value.
But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite poles, and at each pole in an opposite way.
Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are connected.
On the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a use-value.
Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real embodiment of its value.
On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money.
These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the process of their exchange moves and takes place.
Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, our old friend the weaver of linen — to the scene of action, the market.
The exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite yet supplementary character — the conversion of the commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity.
In like manner he procures his other means of subsistence and means of production.
From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the product of his labour for the product of some one else’s, nothing more than an exchange of products.
The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the objects themselves, C — C, the exchange of one commodity for another, the circulation of materialised social labour.
When this result is attained, the process is at an end.
The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, into the body of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the salto mortale of the commodity.
If it falls short, then, although the commodity itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is.
The social division of labour causes his labour to be as one-sided as his wants are many-sided.
This is precisely the reason why the product of his labour serves him solely as exchange-value.
But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal equivalent, except by being converted into money.
That money, however, is in some one else’s pocket.
In order to entice the money out of that pocket, our friend’s commodity must, above all things, be a use-value to the owner of the money.
For this, it is necessary that the labour expended upon it, be of a kind that is socially useful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of labour.
But division of labour is a system of production which has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow behind the backs of the producers.
The commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the product of some new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself to new requirements.
The circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation.
Tomorrow the article may, either altogether or partially, be superseded by some other appropriate product.
Moreover, although our weaver’s labour may be a recognised branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen.
Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making presents.
But suppose his product turn out a real use-value, and thereby attracts money?
The question arises, how much will it attract?
No doubt the answer is already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its value.
We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscalculation of value by our friend, a mistake that is soon rectified in the market.
We suppose him to have spent on his product only that amount of labour-time that is on an average socially necessary.
The price then, is merely the money-name of the quantity of social labour realised in his commodity.
But without the leave, and behind the back, of our weaver, the old-fashioned mode of weaving undergoes a change.
Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far between.
Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the market contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary.
In spite of this, all these pieces taken as a whole, may have had superfluous labour-time spent upon them.
The effect is the same as if each individual weaver had expended more labour-time upon his particular product than is socially necessary.
Here we may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together.
All the linen in the market counts but as one article of commerce, of which each piece is only an aliquot part.
And as a matter of fact, the value also of each single yard is but the materialised form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homogeneous human labour.
We see then, commodities are in love with money, but “the course of true love never did run smooth.
The division of labour converts the product of labour into a commodity, and thereby makes necessary its further conversion into money.
At the same time it also makes the accomplishment of this transubstantiation quite accidental.
Here, however, we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be normal.
Moreover, if the conversion take place at all, that is, if the commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although the price realised may be abnormally above or below the value.
The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer has his gold replaced by a commodity.
For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equivalent.
For a particular form of its own use-value.
Why does gold take the form of money face to face with the linen?
Because the linen’s price of £2, its denomination in money, has already equated the linen to gold in its character of money.
A commodity strips off its original commodity-form on being alienated, i.
The apparently single process is in reality a double one.
From the pole of the commodity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money-owner, it is a purchase.
In other words, a sale is a purchase, C—M is also M—C.
In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of course enter the market at some point or other.
This point is to be found at the source of production of the metal, at which place gold is bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other product of equal value.
From that moment it always represents the realised price of some commodity.
It became real money, by the general alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality the embodiment of their values.
We cannot tell from the mere look of a piece of money, for what particular commodity it has been exchanged.
Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is not money.
We will assume that the two gold pieces, in consideration of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the metamorphosed shape of a quarter of wheat.
The sale of the linen, C—M, is at the same time its purchase, M—C.
The first metamorphosis of one commodity, its transformation from a commodity into money, is therefore also invariably the second metamorphosis of some other commodity, the retransformation of the latter from money into a commodity.
Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other commodities, the result of their general alienation, for this reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition.
It reads all prices backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies of all other commodities, which offer to it the material for the realisation of its own use-value.
At the same time the prices, wooing glances cast at money by commodities, define the limits of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity.
Non olet, from whatever source it may come.
Representing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other a commodity to be bought.
M—C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C—M, a sale; the concluding metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamorphosis of another.
With regard to our weaver, the life of his commodity ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2.
Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various articles.
The concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus constitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of various other commodities.
If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a commodity, as a whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made up of two opposite and complementary movements, C—M and M—C.
As the person who makes a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a buyer.
These characters of seller and buyer are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities.
The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest form, implies four extremes, and three dramatic personae.
First, a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form taken by the value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, in the pocket of the buyer.
A commodity-owner is thus brought into contact with a possessor of money.
So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed into money, the money becomes its transient equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is to be found in the bodies of other commodities.
Money, the final term of the first transmutation, is at the same time the starting-point for the second.
The person who is a seller in the first transaction thus becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity-owner appears on the scene as a seller.
The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, and return to the commodity-form.
No doubt, the commodity appears here under two different aspects.
At the starting-point it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is.
The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the same time two inverse partial metamorphoses of two other commodities.
One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series of its own metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of another (the wheat).
In the first phase or sale, the linen plays these two parts in its own person.
But, then, changed into gold, it completes its own second and final metamorphosis, and helps at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third commodity.
Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably mixed up with the circuits of other commodities.
The total of all the different circuits constitutes the circulation of commodities.
The circulation of commodities differs from the direct exchange of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance.
The weaver has, as a matter of fact, exchanged his linen for a Bible, his own commodity for that of some one else.
But this is true only so far as he himself is concerned.
The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to warm his inside, no more thought of exchanging his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for his linen.
The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct barter of products, become extinguished upon the use-values changing places and hands.
The money does not vanish on dropping out of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given commodity.
It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena of circulation vacated by other commodities.
In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example, linen — money — Bible, the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its place.
Then the Bible falls out of circulation, and again money takes its place.
When one commodity replaces another, the money-commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person.
Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases.
If this means that the number of actual sales is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology.
But its real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to market with him.
The sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity-owner and an owner of money, between two persons as opposed to each other as the two poles of a magnet.
They form two distinct acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one single person.
That identity further implies that the exchange, if it does take place, constitutes a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the life of the commodity.
Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once a sale and a purchase, it is also an independent process in itself.
The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.
No one can sell unless some one else purchases.
But no one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has just sold.
To say that these two independent and antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic oneness expresses itself in an external antithesis.
These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possibility, of crises.
The conversion of this mere possibility into a reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence.
The movement of the commodity is therefore a circuit.
On the other hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made by the money.
The result is not the return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting-point.
But so soon as he completes the process, so soon as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the hands of its possessor.
It is true that if the weaver, after buying the Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands.
But this return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; that circulation resulted in the money getting into the hands of the seller of the Bible.
This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie).
The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the same process.
The commodity is always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer.
And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity.
That this one-sided character of the money’s motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity’s motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over.
The very nature of the circulation of commodities begets the opposite appearance.
In the first phase of its circulation the commodity changes place with the money.
Thereupon the commodity, under its aspect of a useful object, falls out of circulation into consumption.
In its stead we have its value-shape — the money.
It then goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of money.
The latter is continually withdrawing commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in thus way continually moving further and further from its starting-point.
Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the values of commodities have independent reality.
Hence its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement of commodities while changing their forms.
This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the currency of money.
Thus the linen for instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its money-form.
The second term of its first metamorphosis, C—M, the money form, then becomes the first term of its final metamorphosis, M—C, its re-conversion into the Bible.
But each of these two changes of form is accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their reciprocal displacement.
The same pieces of coin come into the seller’s hand as the alienated form of the commodity and leave it as the absolutely alienable form of the commodity.
The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the weaver’s pocket, the second draws them out of it.
The two inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin.
If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a given piece of money changes its place only once.
Its second change of place always expresses the second metamorphosis of the commodity, its re-conversion from money.
It is a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple circulation of commodities alone, the only form that we are now considering.
Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circulation again and to be replaced by other commodities.
Money, on the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it.
The question therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs?
In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamorphoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and numerous purchases.
The commodities are equated beforehand in imagination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money.
As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed beforehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities.
The equality of these two sums is therefore self-evident.
We know, however, that, the values of commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and falling in proportion as it rises.
First, the price of the commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then the quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the commodities.
In the one case, more silver would be current than gold was before; in the other case, less gold would be current than silver was before.
In each case the value of the material of money, i.
We have already seen, that the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or the material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity with a given value.
Hence, when money enters on its functions as a measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already determined.
If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bartered for the precious metals at the sources of their production.
This process is accompanied by the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles directly bartered for them at their sources of production.
Henceforth we shall consider the value of gold to be given, as, in fact, it is momentarily, whenever we estimate the price of a commodity.
On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of circulation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised.
If now we further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends on the mass of commodities in circulation.
If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circulating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of those commodities.
It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices increases or diminishes in consequence of the change of price.
To produce this effect, it is by no means requisite that the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously.
These antithetic and complementary phases, of which the process of metamorphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but successively.
Time is therefore required for the completion of the series.
Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given time.
Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day.
The quantity of money thrown into the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course determined by the sum of the prices of all the commodities circulating simultaneously side by side.
But once in circulation, coins are, so to say, made responsible for one another.
Hence if the number of moves made by the separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in circulation diminishes.
If the number of the moves diminish, the total number of pieces increases.
The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the origin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the phenomenon itself.
The general public, who, simultaneously with the retardation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less frequently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium.
On this rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin.
But the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, as well as on the prices, of the commodities.
These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, and velocity of money-currency, are all variable.
Hence, the sum of the prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous variations of these three factors in combination.
Of these variations we shall consider those alone that have been the most important in the history of prices.
While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulating medium may increase owing to the number of circulating commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreasing, or to a combination of the two.
On the other hand the quantity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their circulation.
The quantity of the circulating medium may decrease, owing to the number of commodities decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency increasing more rapidly, than prices rise.
The quantity of the circulating medium will increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices fall.
That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function as the circulating medium.
The weight of gold represented in imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, must confront those commodities, within the circulation, in the shape of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination.
Coining, like the establishment of a standard of prices, is the business of the State.
The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is one of shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to the other.
But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it immediately finds itself on the high-road to the melting pot.
During their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less.
Name and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their process of separation.
Coins of the same denomination become different in value, because they are different in weight.
The history of coinage during the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever renewed confusion arising from this cause.
Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions of the circulation where coins pass from hand to hand most rapidly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear.
This occurs where sales and purchases on a very small scale are continually happening.
In order to prevent these satellites from establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive enactments determine the extent to which they must be compulsorily received as payment instead of gold.
The particular tracks pursued by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally into each other.
The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbitrarily fixed by law.
When in currency, they wear away even more rapidly than gold coins.
Hence their functions are totally independent of their weight, and consequently of all value.
The function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of the metallic value of that gold.
Therefore things that are relatively without value, such as paper notes, can serve as coins in its place.
This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens.
In fact, ce n’est que le premier pas qui coûte.
We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by the State and having compulsory circulation.
It has its immediate origin in the metallic currency.
Money based upon credit implies on the other hand conditions, which, from our standpoint of the simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally unknown to us.
In so far as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of money itself.
A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can spring up only from the proportion in which that paper money represents gold.
Now the quantity of gold which the circulation can absorb, constantly fluctuates about a given level.
Still, the mass of the circulating medium in a given country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by actual experience.
It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols.
The effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken place in the function of gold as a standard of prices.
Paper money is a token representing gold or money.
The relation between it and the values of commodities is this, that the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold that are symbolically represented by the paper.
Only in so far as paper money represents gold, which like all other commodities has value, is it a symbol of value.
Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by tokens that have no value?
But, as we have already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else.
Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually circulates.
But this is just the case with that minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by paper money.
That mass remains constantly within the sphere of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and exists exclusively for that purpose.
Its movement therefore represents nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse phases of the metamorphosis C—M—C, phases in which commodities confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immediately.
The independent existence of the exchange-value of a commodity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the commodity is immediately replaced by another commodity.
Hence, in this process which continually makes money pass from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices.
Its functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material existence.
Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodities, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token.
One thing is, however, requisite; this token must have an objective social validity of its own, and this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency.
The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its own person or by a representative, as the medium of circulation, is money.
It functions as money, on the one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person.
It is then the money-commodity, neither merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function of circulating medium.
With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodities, there is also developed the necessity, and the passionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis.
This product is the transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis.
Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form by their money-form.
From being the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the end and aim.
The changed form of the commodity is thus prevented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or as its merely transient money-form.
The money becomes petrified into a hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money.
In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the surplus use-values alone that are converted into money.
Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth.
This naive form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode of production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited circle of home wants.
It is thus with the people of Asia, and particularly of the East Indies.
Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices of commodities in a country are determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why Indian commodities are so cheap.
Most of the silver exported to China makes its way to India.
As the production of commodities further develops, every producer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the nexus rerum or the social pledge.
His wants are constantly making themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase of other people’s commodities, while the production and sale of his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances.
In order then to be able to buy without selling, he must have sold previously without buying.
This operation, conducted on a general scale, appears to imply a contradiction.
But the precious metals at the sources of their production are directly exchanged for other commodities.
And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without purchases (by the owners of gold or silver).
And subsequent sales, by other producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely bring about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals among all the owners of commodities.
In this way, all along the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent are accumulated.
With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the shape of a particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold.
Along with the extension of circulation, increases the power of money, that absolutely social form of wealth ever ready for use.
Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants.
By means of gold one can even get souls into Paradise.
The circulation becomes the great social retort into which everything is thrown, to come out again as a gold-crystal.
Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosanctae, extra commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy.
Just as every qualitative difference between commodities is extinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller that it is, does away with all distinctions.
Thus social power becomes the private power of private persons.
The ancients therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order of things.
A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a particular want, and is a particular element of material wealth.
But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other elements of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth of its owner.
It is true that the value of money varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence of a change in the values of commodities.
The desire after hoarding is in its very nature unsatiable.
In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.
But, at the same time, every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy.
This antagonism between the quantitative limits of money and its qualitative boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like labour of accumulating.
It is with him as it is with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed, only a new boundary.
In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from transforming itself into a means of enjoyment.
The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish.
He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention.
On the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities.
The more he produces, the more he is able to sell.
Hard work, saving, and avarice are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy.
By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles.
This grows with the wealth of civil society.
Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the metallic circulation.
Its first function arises out of the conditions to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject.
We have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the extent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their prices, the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows.
This mass must, therefore, be capable of expansion and contraction.
At one time money must be attracted in order to act as circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money.
This condition is fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards.
These reserves serve as conduits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circulation, which in this way never overflows its banks.
The owners of commodities came therefore into contact as the respective representatives of what were already equivalents.
But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation of commodities becomes separated, by an interval of time, from the realisation of their prices.
It will be sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions.
One sort of article requires a longer, another a shorter time for its production.
Again, the production of different commodities depends on different seasons of the year.
One sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to make a long journey to market.
When the same transactions are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production.
On the other hand, the use of a given commodity, of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period.
Here, it is only at the end of the term that the buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity.
He therefore buys it before he pays for it.
The vendor sells an existing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere representative of money, or rather of future money.
The vendor becomes a creditor, the purchaser becomes a debtor.
Since the metamorphosis of commodities, or the development of their value-form, appears here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; it becomes the means of payment.
The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple circulation.
The change in the form of that circulation stamps buyer and seller with this new die.
At first, therefore, these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors.
But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation.
The same characters can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities.
The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended in the ruin of the plebeian debtors.
In the middle ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic basis on which it was established.
Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor and creditor that existed at these two periods reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of existence of the classes in question.
Let us return to the circulation of commodities.
The appearance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at the two poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous.
Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase.
Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to pay, it causes the commodity to change hands.
It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means of payment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of the seller.
The circulating medium was transformed into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase, because the converted shape of the commodity, viz.
The means of payment enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left it.
The money is no longer the means that brings about the process.
It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity.
The value-form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself.
The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned commodities into money: in other words, he achieves the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first.
The seller’s commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal claim upon money.
It is converted into a use-value before it has been converted into money.
The completion of its first metamorphosis follows only at a later period.
The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave rise to those obligations.
The quantity of gold necessary to realise this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the means of payment.
The continuous chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially different from that interlacing of the series of metamorphoses which we considered on a former page.
By the currency of the circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, is not merely expressed.
This connexion is originated by, and exists in, the circulation alone.
Contrariwise, the movement of the means of payment expresses a social relation that was in existence long before.
The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced by the rapidity of currency.
On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in economising the means of payment.
In proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation.
Such in the middle ages were the virements at Lyons.
There thus remains only a single balance to pay.
The greater the amount of the payments concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in circulation.
The function of money as the means of payment implies a contradiction without a terminus medius.
In so far as the payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a measure of value.
This contradiction comes to a head in those phases of industrial and commercial crises which are known as monetary crises.
Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of payments, and an artificial system of settling them, has been fully developed.
Whenever there is a general and extensive disturbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immediately transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash.
The use-value of commodities becomes valueless, and their value vanishes in the presence of its own independent form.
On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination.
But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commodity!
As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his soul after money, the only wealth.
In a crisis, the antithesis between commodities and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into an absolute contradiction.
Hence, in such events, the form under which money appears is of no importance.
The money famine continues, whether payments have to be made in gold or in credit money such as bank-notes.
Money that represents commodities long withdrawn from circulation, continues to be current.
Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not appear on the scene till some future day.
Moreover, the debts contracted each day, and the payments falling due on the same day, are quite incommensurable quantities.
Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money as a means of payment.
Certificates of the debts owing for the purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to others.
On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money as a means of payment.
In that character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in the sphere of great commercial transactions.
Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of retail trade.
When the production of commodities has sufficiently extended itself, money begins to serve as the means of payment beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities.
It becomes the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all contracts.
Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from payments in kind into money payments.
The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural population under Louis XIV.
In Asia, on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in kind, depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena.
And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production.
It is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire.
If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the exemplary agriculture of that country.
The narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is carried on, will be swept away.
In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recognised settling days for various large and recurrent payments.
These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduction, on conditions closely connected with the seasons.
They also regulate the dates for payments that have no direct connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on.
The quantity of money requisite to make the payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment.
The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing.
While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress of civil society, the formation of reserves of the means of payment grows with that progress.
In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be universally recognised.
Hence their independent value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under the shape of universal money.
Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal concept.
Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one commodity which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes money.
In the markets of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and silver.
Money of the world serves as the universal medium of payment, as the universal means of purchasing, and as the universally recognised embodiment of all wealth.
Its function as a means of payment in the settling of international balances is its chief one.
Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, balance of trade.
Gold and silver serve as international means of purchasing chiefly and necessarily in those periods when the customary equilibrium in the interchange of products between different nations is suddenly disturbed.
Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circulation so, too, it requires one for external circulation in the markets of the world.
For this latter function, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold and silver, is necessary.
On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them from their purely local substitutes, calls gold and silver “money of the world.
The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one.
This first current is started by the countries that exchange their labour, realised in commodities, for the labour embodied in the precious metals by gold and silver-producing countries.
Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the even flow of their metamorphoses.
The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital.
The production of commodities, their circulation, and that more developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical ground-work from which it rises.
The modern history of capital dates from the creation in the 16th century of a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market.
As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer.
But we have no need to refer to the origin of capital in order to discover that the first form of appearance of capital is money.
We can see it daily under our very eyes.
The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a difference in their form of circulation.
The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C—M—C, the transformation of commodities into money, and the change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy.
But alongside of this form we find another specifically different form: M—C—M, the transformation of money into commodities, and the change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell.
Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, and is already potentially capital.
Now let us examine the circuit M—C—M a little closer.
It consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases.
In the first phase, M—C, or the purchase, the money is changed into a commodity.
In the second phase, C—M, or the sale, the commodity is changed back again into money.
The result, in which the phases of the process vanish, is the exchange of money for money, M—M.
The miser’s plan would be far simpler and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation.
Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in common.
Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical phases, C—M, a sale, and M—C, a purchase.
In each of these phases the same material elements - a commodity, and money, and the same economic dramatis personae, a buyer and a seller - confront one another.
The simple circulation of commodities begins with a sale and ends with a purchase, while the circulation of money as capital begins with a purchase and ends with a sale.
In the one case both the starting-point and the goal are commodities, in the other they are money.
In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a commodity.
In the circulation C—M—C, the money is in the end converted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value; it is spent once for all.
In the inverted form, M—C—M, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in order that, as a seller, he may recover money.
By the purchase of his commodity he throws money into circulation, in order to withdraw it again by the sale of the same commodity.
He lets the money go, but only with the sly intention of getting it back again.
The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely advanced.
In the circuit C—M—C, the same piece of money changes its place twice.
The seller gets it from the buyer and pays it away to another seller.
The complete circulation, which begins with the receipt, concludes with the payment, of money for commodities.
It is the very contrary in the circuit M—C—M.
Here it is not the piece of money that changes its place twice, but the commodity.
The buyer takes it from the hands of the seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer.
Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold for more than was paid for it.
This circumstance influences only the amount of the money that comes back.
The reflux itself takes place, so soon as the purchased commodity is resold, in other words, so soon as the circuit M—C—M is completed.
We have here, therefore, a palpable difference between the circulation of money as capital, and its circulation as mere money.
The circuit C—M—C comes completely to an end, so soon as the money brought in by the sale of one commodity is abstracted again by the purchase of another.
If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its starting-point, this can only happen through a renewal or repetition of the operation.
If I now sell a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not however as a sequel to the first transaction, but in consequence of its repetition.
The money again leaves me, so soon as I complete this second transaction by a fresh purchase.
Therefore, in the circuit C—M—C, the expenditure of money has nothing to do with its reflux.
On the other hand, in M—C—M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode of its expenditure.
Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process is interrupted and incomplete, owing to the absence of its complementary and final phase, the sale.
The circuit C—M—C starts with one commodity, and finishes with another, which falls out of circulation and into consumption.
Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one word, use-value, is its end and aim.
The circuit M—C—M, on the contrary, commences with money and ends with money.
Its leading motive, and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange-value.
In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of the circuit have the same economic form.
They are both commodities, and commodities of equal value.
But they are also use-values differing in their qualities, as, for example, corn and clothes.
The exchange of products, of the different materials in which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis of the movement.
It is otherwise in the circulation M—C—M, which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological.
They are both money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use-values; for money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their particular use-values vanish.
One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its amount.
The character and tendency of the process M—C—M, is therefore not due to any qualitative difference between its extremes, both being money, but solely to their quantitative difference.
More money is withdrawn from circulation at the finish than was thrown into it at the start.
This increment or excess over the original value I call “surplus-value.
It is this movement that converts it into capital.
The farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at less than their value.
He may, on the other hand, “be done” by the clothes merchant.
Yet, in the form of circulation now under consideration, such differences in value are purely accidental.
The fact that the corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it does in M—C—M.
The equivalence of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course.
But when we buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and end with the same thing, money, exchange-value; and thereby the movement becomes interminable.
If now, the £110 be spent as money, they cease to play their part.
Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that state till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them.
Money ends the movement only to begin it again.
Therefore, the final result of every separate circuit, in which a purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the starting-point of a new circuit.
The simple circulation of commodities - selling in order to buy - is a means of carrying out a purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropriation of use-values, the satisfaction of wants.
The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion of value takes place only within this constantly renewed movement.
The circulation of capital has therefore no limits.
As the conscious representative of this movement, the possessor of money becomes a capitalist.
His person, or rather his pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to which it returns.
Use-values must therefore never be looked upon as the real aim of the capitalist; neither must the profit on any single transaction.
The restless never-ending process of profit-making alone is what he aims at.
This boundless greed after riches, this passionate chase after exchange-value, is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser.
The never-ending augmentation of exchange-value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to save his money from circulation, is attained by the more acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circulation.
It is constantly changing from one form to the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an automatically active character.
For the movement, in the course of which it adds surplus-value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, is automatic expansion.
Because it is value, it has acquired the occult quality of being able to add value to itself.
It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs.
And this form it possesses only in the shape of money.
It is under the form of money that value begins and ends, and begins again, every act of its own spontaneous generation.
But the money itself is only one of the two forms of value.
Unless it takes the form of some commodity, it does not become capital.
There is here no antagonism, as in the case of hoarding, between the money and commodities.
In simple circulation, C—M—C, the value of commodities attained at the most a form independent of their use-values, i.
Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations of commodities, it enters now, so to say, into private relations with itself.
Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital.
It comes out of circulation, enters into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of it with expanded bulk, and begins the same round ever afresh.
M—M′, money which begets money, such is the description of Capital from the mouths of its first interpreters, the Mercantilists.
Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell dearer, M—C—M′, appears certainly to be a form peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants’ capital.
But industrial capital too is money, that is changed into commodities, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted into more money.
The events that take place outside the sphere of circulation, in the interval between the buying and selling, do not affect the form of this movement.
Lastly, in the case of interest-bearing capital, the circulation M—C—M′ appears abridged.
We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the form M—M′, “en style lapidaire” so to say, money that is worth more money, value that is greater than itself.
M—C—M′ is therefore in reality the general formula of capital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of circulation.
The form which circulation takes when money becomes capital, is opposed to all the laws we have hitherto investigated bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and even of circulation itself.
What distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase.
How can this purely formal distinction between these processes change their character as it were by magic?
This inversion has no existence for two out of the three persons who transact business together.
But the connexion between the two acts exists for me alone.
In truth, my first act, the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my second act, the sale, was from the standpoint of B, a purchase.
Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which it presents itself as a simple and direct exchange of commodities.
This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy from each other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually owing are equal and cancel each other.
The money in this case is money of account and serves to express the value of the commodities by their prices, but is not, itself, in the shape of hard cash, confronted with them.
So far as regards use-values, it is clear that both parties may gain some advantage.
Both part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service to them, and receive others that they can make use of.
And there may also be a further gain.
A, therefore, may get, for the same exchange-value, more corn, and B more wine, than each would respectively get without any exchange by producing his own corn and wine.
With reference, therefore, to use-value, there is good ground for saying that “exchange is a transaction by which both sides gain.
The value of a commodity is expressed in its price before it goes into circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its result.
This change of form does not imply a change in the magnitude of the value.
But the change, which the value of the commodity undergoes in this process, is limited to a change in its money-form.
This change of form no more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, than does the change of a £5 note into sovereigns, half sovereigns and shillings.
So far therefore as the circulation of commodities effects a change in the form alone of their values, and is free from disturbing influences, it must be the exchange of equivalents.
If therefore, as regards the use-values exchanged, both buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the case as regards the exchange-values.
Here we must rather say, “Where equality exists there can be no gain.
Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent the circulation of commodities as a source of surplus-value, there lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value.
For instance, Condillac says: “It is not true that on an exchange of commodities we give value for value.
If we really exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit.
And yet, they both gain, or ought to gain.
The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to our wants.
But there is another point to be considered in our calculation.
The question is, whether we both exchange something superfluous for something necessary.
Still, Condillac’s argument is frequently used by modern economists, more especially when the point is to show, that the exchange of commodities in its developed form, commerce, is productive of surplus-value.
And though the use-value of a commodity is more serviceable to the buyer than to the seller, its money-form is more serviceable to the seller.
We might therefore just as well say that the buyer performs "strictly an act of production,” by converting stockings, for example, into money.
If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange-value, and consequently equivalents, are exchanged, it is plain that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, circulation.
And, in its normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the exchange of equivalents.
But in actual practice, the process does not retain its normal form.
Let us, therefore, assume an exchange of non-equivalents.
In any case the market for commodities is only frequented by owners of commodities, and the power which these persons exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their commodities.
And consequently the owners of commodities are distinguishable only as sellers, those who own commodities, and buyers, those who own money.
The seller therefore pockets a surplus-value of 10.
But after he has sold he becomes a buyer.
A third owner of commodities comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity also enjoys the privilege of selling his commodities 10% too dear.
Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as a buyer.
The net result is, that all owners of commodities sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value, which comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true value.
Such a general and nominal rise of prices has the same effect as if the values had been expressed in weight of silver instead of in weight of gold.
The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the real relation between their values would remain unchanged.
Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has the privilege of purchasing commodities under their value.
In this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his turn will become a seller.
The creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion of money into capital, can consequently be explained neither on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, nor that they are bought below their value.
The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrelevant matters after the manner of Col.
Torrens: “Effectual demand consists in the power and inclination (!
The seller has himself produced the commodities or represents their producer, but the buyer has to no less extent produced the commodities represented by his money, or represents their producer.
The distinction between them is, that one buys and the other sells.
The existence of such a class is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, viz.
The money with which such a class is constantly making purchases, must constantly flow into their pockets, without any exchange, gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity-owners themselves.
To sell commodities above their value to such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the money previously given to it.
The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute to ancient Rome.
With this money Rome purchased from them commodities, and purchased them too dear.
The provincials cheated the Romans, and thus got back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion of the tribute.
Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really cheated.
Their goods were still paid for with their own money.
That is not the way to get rich or to create surplus-value.
Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers.
Our difficulty may perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications instead of as individuals.
Let us examine this a little more closely.
After the exchange we have still the same total value of £90.
The value in circulation has not increased by one iota, it is only distributed differently between A and B.
What is a loss of value to B is surplus-value to A; what is “minus” to one is “plus” to the other.
The same change would have taken place, if A, without the formality of an exchange, had directly stolen the £10 from B.
The capitalist class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach themselves.
Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered.
If equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value results, and if non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus-value.
Circulation, or the exchange of commodities, begets no value.
The circuit M-C-M, buying in order to sell dearer, is seen most clearly in genuine merchants’ capital.
But the movement takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation.
It is in this sense that Franklin says, “war is robbery, commerce is generally cheating.
What we have said with reference to merchants’ capital, applies still more to money-lenders’ capital.
For it originated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out of money, more money.
Hence its name ([greek: tokos] interest and offspring).
For the begotten are like those who beget them.
But interest is money of money, so that of all modes of making a living, this is the most contrary to Nature.
We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by circulation, and, therefore, that in its formation, something must take place in the background, which is not apparent in the circulation itself.
But can surplus-value possibly originate anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all the mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are determined by their commodities?
Apart from circulation, the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own commodity.
So far as regards value, that relation is limited to this, that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity being measured by a definite social standard.
This quantity is expressed by the value of the commodity, and since the value is reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed by the price, which we will suppose to be £10.
The commodity owner can, by his labour, create value, but not self-expanding value.
He can increase the value of his commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more value to the value in hand, by making, for instance, leather into boots.
The same material has now more value, because it contains a greater quantity of labour.
The boots have therefore more value than the leather, but the value of the leather remains what it was; it has not expanded itself, has not, during the making of the boots, annexed surplus-value.
It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circulation, a producer of commodities can, without coming into contact with other commodity-owners, expand value, and consequently convert money or commodities into capital.
It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by circulation, and it is equally impossible for it to originate apart from circulation.
It must have its origin both in circulation and yet not in circulation.
The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on the basis of the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities, in such a way that the starting-point is the exchange of equivalents.
His development into a full-grown capitalist must take place, both within the sphere of circulation and without it.
Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the re-sale of the commodity, which does no more than transform the article from its bodily form back again into its money-form.
The change must, therefore, take place in the commodity bought by the first act, M-C, but not in its value, for equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity is paid for at its full value.
We are, therefore, forced to the conclusion that the change originates in the use-value, as such, of the commodity, i.
The possessor of money does find on the market such a special commodity in capacity for labour or labour-power.
By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood the aggregate of those mental and physical capabilities existing in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any description.
But in order that our owner of money may be able to find labour-power offered for sale as a commodity, various conditions must first be fulfilled.
The exchange of commodities of itself implies no other relations of dependence than those which result from its own nature.
In order that he may be able to do this, he must have it at his disposal, must be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.
By this means alone can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it.
In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other than labour-power, he must of course have the means of production, as raw material, implements, &c.
The time necessary for their sale is superadded to that necessary for their production.
The question why this free labourer confronts him in the market, has no interest for the owner of money, who regards the labour-market as a branch of the general market for commodities.
And for the present it interests us just as little.
We cling to the fact theoretically, as he does practically.
One thing, however, is clear — Nature does not produce on the one side owners of money or commodities, and on the other men possessing nothing but their own labour-power.
This relation has no natural basis, neither is its social basis one that is common to all historical periods.
It is clearly the result of a past historical development, the product of many economic revolutions, of the extinction of a whole series of older forms of social production.
So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, bear the stamp of history.
Definite historical conditions are necessary that a product may become a commodity.
It must not be produced as the immediate means of subsistence of the producer himself.
Such an inquiry, however, would have been foreign to the analysis of commodities.
The appearance of products as commodities pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour, that the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which first begins with barter, must already have been completed.
But such a degree of development is common to many forms of society, which in other respects present the most varying historical features.
On the other hand, if we consider money, its existence implies a definite stage in the exchange of commodities.
Yet we know by experience that a circulation of commodities relatively primitive, suffices for the production of all these forms.
The historical conditions of its existence are by no means given with the mere circulation of money and commodities.
It can spring into life, only when the owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the market with the free labourer selling his labour-power.
And this one historical condition comprises a world’s history.
Capital, therefore, announces from its first appearance a new epoch in the process of social production.
We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, labour-power.
The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of every other commodity, by the labour-time necessary for the production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this special article.
So far as it has value, it represents no more than a definite quantity of the average labour of society incorporated in it.
Labour-power exists only as a capacity, or power of the living individual.
Given the individual, the production of labour-power consists in his reproduction of himself or his maintenance.
For his maintenance he requires a given quantity of the means of subsistence.
Labour-power, however, becomes a reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working.
But thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, &c.
If the owner of labour-power works to-day, to-morrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as regards health and strength.
His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal state as a labouring individual.
His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary according to the climatic and other physical conditions of his country.
In contradistinction therefore to the case of other commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of labour-power a historical and moral element.
Nevertheless, in a given country, at a given period, the average quantity of the means of subsistence necessary for the labourer is practically known.
Hence the sum of the means of subsistence necessary for the production of labour-power must include the means necessary for the labourer’s substitutes, i.
This amount varies according to the more or less complicated character of the labour-power.
The expenses of this education (excessively small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto into the total value spent in its production.
The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a definite quantity of the means of subsistence.
It therefore varies with the value of these means or with the quantity of labour requisite for their production.
Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be provided daily.
Others such as clothes and furniture last for longer periods and require to be replaced only at longer intervals.
One article must be bought or paid for daily, another weekly, another quarterly, and so on.
But in whatever way the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the year, they must be covered by the average income, taking one day with another.
This quantity of labour forms the value of a day’s labour-power or the value of the labour-power daily reproduced.
If half a day’s average social labour is incorporated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price corresponding to the value of a day’s labour-power.
If the price of labour-power fall to this minimum, it falls below its value, since under such circumstances it can be maintained and developed only in a crippled state.
But the value of every commodity is determined by the labour-time requisite to turn it out so as to be of normal quality.
When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we speak at the same time of the labourer and his means of subsistence, of labourer and wages.
The latter process requires something more than a good stomach.
When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not abstract from the necessary means of subsistence.
On the contrary, their value is expressed in its value.
The alienation of labour-power and its actual appropriation by the buyer, its employment as a use-value, are separated by an interval of time.
That this credit is no mere fiction, is shown not only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the capitalist, but also by a series of more enduring consequences.
Nevertheless, whether money serves as a means of purchase or as a means of payment, this makes no alteration in the nature of the exchange of commodities.
The price of the labour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not realised till later, like the rent of a house.
The labour-power is sold, although it is only paid for at a later period.
We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the possessor of this peculiar commodity, labour-power, is determined.
The use-value which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself only in the actual utilisation, in the consumption of the labour-power.
The money-owner buys everything necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in the market, and pays for it at its full value.
The consumption of labour-power is at one and the same time the production of commodities and of surplus-value.
The consumption of labour-power is completed, as in the case of every other commodity, outside the limits of the market or of the sphere of circulation.
We shall at last force the secret of profit making.
This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries the sale and purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate rights of man.
There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and Bentham.
Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained only by their own free will.
They contract as free agents, and the agreement they come to, is but the form in which they give legal expression to their common will.
Equality, because each enters into relation with the other, as with a simple owner of commodities, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent.
Property, because each disposes only of what is his own.
And Bentham, because each looks only to himself.
The only force that brings them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the selfishness, the gain and the private interests of each.
He, who before was the money-owner, now strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of labour-power follows as his labourer.
The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour-power in use is labour itself.
The purchaser of labour-power consumes it by setting the seller of it to work.
By working, the latter becomes actually, what before he only was potentially, labour-power in action, a labourer.
In order that his labour may re-appear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it on something useful, on something capable of satisfying a want of some sort.
Hence, what the capitalist sets the labourer to produce, is a particular use-value, a specified article.
The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is carried on under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not alter the general character of that production.
We shall, therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-process independently of the particular form it assumes under given social conditions.
Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and Nature participate, and in which man of his own accord starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between himself and Nature.
By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature.
He develops his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway.
We are not now dealing with those primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind us of the mere animal.
We pre-suppose labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human.
A spider conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction of her cells.
But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination before he erects it in reality.
At the end of every labour-process, we get a result that already existed in the imagination of the labourer at its commencement.
And this subordination is no mere momentary act.
Besides the exertion of the bodily organs, the process demands that, during the whole operation, the workman’s will be steadily in consonance with his purpose.
The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the personal activity of man, i.
All those things which labour merely separates from immediate connexion with their environment, are subjects of labour spontaneously provided by Nature.
Such are fish which we catch and take from their element, water, timber which we fell in the virgin forest, and ores which we extract from their veins.
If, on the other hand, the subject of labour has, so to say, been filtered through previous labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted and ready for washing.
All raw material is the subject of labour, but not every subject of labour is raw material: it can only become so, after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour.
An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, which the labourer interposes between himself and the subject of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity.
He makes use of the mechanical, physical, and chemical properties of some substances in order to make other substances subservient to his aims.
Thus Nature becomes one of the organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily organs, adding stature to himself in spite of the Bible.
As the earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house.
It supplies him, for instance, with stones for throwing, grinding, pressing, cutting, &c.
The earth itself is an instrument of labour, but when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of other instruments and a comparatively high development of labour.
No sooner does labour undergo the least development, than it requires specially prepared instruments.
Thus in the oldest caves we find stone implements and weapons.
In the earliest period of human history domesticated animals, i.
The use and fabrication of instruments of labour, although existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Franklin therefore defines man as a tool-making animal.
Relics of bygone instruments of labour possess the same importance for the investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil bones for the determination of extinct species of animals.
It is not the articles made, but how they are made, and by what instruments, that enables us to distinguish different economic epochs.
Instruments of labour not only supply a standard of the degree of development to which human labour has attained, but they are also indicators of the social conditions under which that labour is carried on.
The latter first begins to play an important part in the chemical industries.
These do not enter directly into the process, but without them it is either impossible for it to take place at all, or possible only to a partial extent.
Once more we find the earth to be a universal instrument of this sort, for it furnishes a locus standi to the labourer and a field of employment for his activity.
Among instruments that are the result of previous labour and also belong to this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and so forth.
In the labour-process, therefore, man’s activity, with the help of the instruments of labour, effects an alteration, designed from the commencement, in the material worked upon.
The process disappears in the product, the latter is a use-value, Nature’s material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man.
Labour has incorporated itself with its subject: the former is materialised, the latter transformed.
That which in the labourer appeared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed quality without motion.
The blacksmith forges and the product is a forging.
Though a use-value, in the form of a product, issues from the labour-process, yet other use-values, products of previous labour, enter into it as means of production.
The same use-value is both the product of a previous process, and a means of production in a later process.
Products are therefore not only results, but also essential conditions of labour.
But in the great majority of cases, instruments of labour show even to the most superficial observer, traces of the labour of past ages.
Raw material may either form the principal substance of a product, or it may enter into its formation only as an accessory.
The distinction between principal substance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical industries, because there none of the raw material re-appears, in its original composition, in the substance of the product.
Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable of being applied to different uses.
One and the same product may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes.
Corn, for example, is a raw material for millers, starch-manufacturers, distillers, and cattlebreeders.
It also enters as raw material into its own production in the shape of seed; coal, too, is at the same time the product of, and a means of production in, coal-mining.
Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same process, both as an instrument of labour and as raw material.
Take, for instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is the raw material, and at the same time an instrument for the production of manure.
A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may yet serve as raw material for a further product, as grapes when they become the raw material for wine.
On the other hand, labour may give us its product in such a form, that we can use it only as raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and yarn.
Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of production into a new labour-process, it thereby loses its character of product, and becomes a mere factor in the process.
A spinner treats spindles only as implements for spinning, and flax only as the material that he spins.
On the contrary, it is generally by their imperfections as products, that the means of production in any process assert themselves in their character of products.
A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly remind us of Mr.
In the finished product the labour by means of which it has acquired its useful qualities is not palpable, has apparently vanished.
A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless.
In addition, it falls a prey to the destructive influence of natural forces.
Yarn with which we neither weave nor knit, is cotton wasted.
Living labour must seize upon these things and rouse them from their death-sleep, change them from mere possible use-values into real and effective ones.
Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its instruments, consumes them, and is therefore a process of consumption.
The product, therefore, of individual consumption, is the consumer himself; the result of productive consumption, is a product distinct from the consumer.
It was, therefore, not necessary to represent our labourer in connexion with other labourers; man and his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on the other, sufficed.
Let us now return to our would-be capitalist.
We left him just after he had purchased, in the open market, all the necessary factors of the labour process; its objective factors, the means of production, as well as its subjective factor, labour-power.
With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of production and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking, or any other kind.
He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the labour-power that he has just bought, by causing the labourer, the impersonation of that labour-power, to consume the means of production by his labour.
Changes in the methods of production by the subordination of labour to capital, can take place only at a later period, and therefore will have to be treated of in a later chapter.
The labour-process, turned into the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two characteristic phenomena.
Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and not that of the labourer, its immediate producer.
To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its use, and the seller of labour-power, by giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part with the use-value that he has sold.
From the instant he steps into the workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore also its use, which is labour, belongs to the capitalist.
By the purchase of labour-power, the capitalist incorporates labour, as a living ferment, with the lifeless constituents of the product.
From his point of view, the labour-process is nothing more than the consumption of the commodity purchased, i.
The labour-process is a process between things that the capitalist has purchased, things that have become his property.
The product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much as does the wine which is the product of a process of fermentation completed in his cellar.
The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as yarn, for example, or boots.
But, although boots are, in one sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a decided “progressist,” yet he does not manufacture boots for their own sake.
Use-value is, by no means, the thing “qu’on aime pour lui-même” in the production of commodities.
Use-values are only produced by capitalists, because, and in so far as, they are the material substratum, the depositories of exchange-value.
His aim is to produce not only a use-value, but a commodity also; not only use-value, but value; not only value, but at the same time surplus-value.
It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the production of commodities, and that, up to this point, we have only considered one aspect of the process.
Just as commodities are, at the same time, use-values and values, so the process of producing them must be a labour-process, and at the same time, a process of creating value.
Let us now examine production as a creation of value.
We know that the value of each commodity is determined by the quantity of labour expended on and materialised in it, by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, for its production.
This rule also holds good in the case of the product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the labour-process carried on for him.
For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in this case 10 lbs.
We have no need at present to investigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will assume, bought it at its full value, say of ten shillings.
In this price the labour required for the production of the cotton is already expressed in terms of the average labour of society.
We will further assume that the wear and tear of the spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all other instruments of labour employed, amounts to the value of 2s.
If, then, twenty-four hours’ labour, or two working-days, are required to produce the quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have here, to begin with, two days’ labour already incorporated in the yarn.
We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance that the cotton has taken a new shape while the substance of the spindle has to a certain extent been used up.
By the general law of value, if the value of 40 lbs.
In the case we are considering the same working-time is materialised in the 10 lbs.
Therefore, whether value appears in cotton, in a spindle, or in yarn, makes no difference in the amount of that value.
The labour required for the production of the cotton, the raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour necessary to produce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn.
The same applies to the labour embodied in the spindle, without whose wear and tear the cotton could not be spun.
The values of the means of production, i.
First, the cotton and spindle must concur in the production of a use-value; they must in the present case become yarn.
Value is independent of the particular use-value by which it is borne, but it must be embodied in a use-value of some kind.
Secondly, the time occupied in the labour of production must not exceed the time really necessary under the given social conditions of the case.
We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is owing to the cotton and the spindle.
It amounts to twelve shillings or the value of two days’ work.
The next point for our consideration is, what portion of the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by the labour of the spinner.
The labour of the spinner was then viewed as specifically different from other kinds of productive labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz.
For the operation of spinning, cotton and spindles are a necessity, but for making rifled cannon they would be of no use whatever.
Here, on the contrary, where we consider the labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, i.
Here, we have nothing more to do with the quality, the nature and the specific character of the labour, but merely with its quantity.
We proceed upon the assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, the average labour of a given state of society.
Hereafter we shall see that the contrary assumption would make no difference.
While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly undergoes a transformation: from being motion, it becomes an object without motion; from being the labourer working, it becomes the thing produced.
In the process we are now considering it is of extreme importance, that no more time be consumed in the work of transforming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given social conditions.
Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the product now appear in quite a new light, very different from that in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple.
The raw material serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labour.
Definite quantities of product, these quantities being determined by experience, now represent nothing but definite quantities of labour, definite masses of crystallised labour-time.
They are nothing more than the materialisation of so many hours or so many days of social labour.
Hence, during the spinning process, the cotton absorbs six hours’ labour.
The same quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold of the value of three shillings.
Consequently by the mere labour of spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the cotton.
Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 lbs.
This two and a half days’ labour is also represented by a piece of gold of the value of fifteen shillings.
Hence, fifteen shillings is an adequate price for the 10 lbs.
The value of the product is exactly equal to the value of the capital advanced.
The value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been created, and consequently money has not been converted into capital.
These separate values are now all concentrated in one thing; but so they were also in the sum of fifteen shillings, before it was split up into three parts, by the purchase of the commodities.
There is in reality nothing very strange in this result.
The value of one pound of yarn being eighteenpence, if our capitalist buys 10 lbs.
Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, exclaims: “Oh!
In future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of manufacturing them himself.
But if all his brother capitalists were to do the same, where would he find his commodities in the market?
Let him therefore console himself with the reflection that virtue is its own reward.
He says: “The yarn is of no use to me: I produced it for sale.
“Can the labourer,” he asks, “merely with his arms and legs, produce commodities out of nothing?
Did I not supply him with the materials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be embodied?
And am I to be allowed nothing in return for all this service?
Moreover, there is here no question of service.
A service is nothing more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, or be it of labour.
Our friend, up to this time so purse-proud, suddenly assumes the modest demeanour of his own workman, and exclaims: “Have I myself not worked?
Have I not performed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spinner?
And does not this labour, too, create value?
Meanwhile, after a hearty laugh, he re-assumes his usual mien.
Though he chanted to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he says, he would not give a brass farthing for it.
He leaves this and all such like subterfuges and juggling tricks to the professors of Political Economy, who are paid for it.
He himself is a practical man; and though he does not always consider what he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows what he is about.
The value of a day’s labour-power amounts to 3 shillings, because on our assumption half a day’s labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, i.
The former determines the exchange-value of the labour-power, the latter is its use-value.
The fact that half a day’s labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent him from working a whole day.
What really influenced him was the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself.
This is the special service that the capitalist expects from labour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with the “eternal laws” of the exchange of commodities.
The seller of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity, realises its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value.
He cannot take the one without giving the other.
The use-value of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as little to its seller, as the use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs to the dealer who has sold it.
The owner of the money has paid the value of a day’s labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for a day; a day’s labour belongs to him.
Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the cause of his laughter.
The labourer therefore finds, in the workshop, the means of production necessary for working, not only during six, but during twelve hours.
Just as during the six hours’ process our 10 lbs.
Let us now examine the product of this prolonged process.
There is now materialised in this 20 lbs.
Expressed in gold, the labour of five days is thirty shillings.
This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs.
But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered into the process amounts to 27 shillings.
The value of the yarn is 30 shillings.
The trick has at last succeeded; money has been converted into capital.
Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities, have been in no way violated.
For the capitalist as buyer paid for each commodity, for the cotton, the spindle and the labour-power, its full value.
He then did what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed their use-value.
The consumption of the labour-power, which was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 lbs.
The capitalist, formerly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of commodities.
He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is its exact value.
Yet for all that he withdraws 3 shillings more from circulation than he originally threw into it.
Thus “tout est pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles.
If we now compare the two processes of producing value and of creating surplus-value, we see that the latter is nothing but the continuation of the former beyond a definite point.
If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing value with the labour-process, pure and simple, we find that the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces use-values.
Here we contemplate the labour as producing a particular article; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone, with regard to its end and aim.
But viewed as a value-creating process, the same labour-process presents itself under its quantitative aspect alone.
Here it is a question merely of the time occupied by the labourer in doing the work; of the period during which the labour-power is usefully expended.
Here, the commodities that take part in the process, do not count any longer as necessary adjuncts of labour-power in the production of a definite, useful object.
Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production of any article is counted, as, under the given social conditions, is necessary.
In the first place, it becomes necessary that the labour should be carried on under normal conditions.
If a self-acting mule is the implement in general use for spinning, it would be absurd to supply the spinner with a distaff and spinning wheel.
The cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in being worked, but must be of suitable quality.
Otherwise the spinner would be found to spend more time in producing a pound of yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the excess of time would create neither value nor money.
But whether the material factors of the process are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the labourer, but entirely upon the capitalist.
Then again, the labour-power itself must be of average efficacy.
In the trade in which it is being employed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy labour-power of such normal goodness.
He has bought the use of the labour-power for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights.
This power being higher-value, its consumption is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does.
But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, the reduction of skilled labour to average social labour, e.
We therefore save ourselves a superfluous operation, and simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled average labour.
The various factors of the labour-process play different parts in forming the value of the product.
The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of his labour by expending upon it a given amount of additional labour, no matter what the specific character and utility of that labour may be.
The value of the means of production is therefore preserved, by being transferred to the product.
This transfer takes place during the conversion of those means into a product, or in other words, during the labour-process.
It is brought about by labour; but how?
But, by the very act of adding new value, he preserves their former values.
Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour and consequently new value?
Evidently, only by labouring productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the weaver by weaving, the smith by forging.
Each use-value disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in a new use-value.
If the special productive labour of the workman were not spinning, he could not convert the cotton into yarn, and therefore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to the yarn.
Suppose the same workman were to change his occupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day’s labour add value to the material he works upon.
Hence at one and the same time there is produced a two-fold result.
By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new value is added, and by the quality of this added labour, the original values of the means of production are preserved in the product.
This two-fold effect, resulting from the two-fold character of labour, may be traced in various phenomena.
His labour is now six times as effective as it was, for the purposes of useful production.
One-sixth as much new labour is absorbed by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value added by the labour to each pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly was.
On the other hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs.
This shows that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in one case to preserve value, and in the other to create value, are essentially different.
Nevertheless, the value that he transfers from the cotton to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before the variation, or, as the case may be, six times as much as before.
The same result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises or falls, while their useful efficacy in the process remains unaltered.
The value that he preserves in the product is directly proportional to the new value that he adds to the product.
Of course, it may be said in one sense, that the labourer preserves old value always in proportion to the quantity of new value that he adds.
Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave out of consideration its purely symbolical representation by tokens.
Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of production transfer their value to the product only so far as along with their use-value they lose also their exchange-value.
They give up to the product that value alone which they themselves lose as means of production.
But in this respect the material factors of the labour-process do not all behave alike.
The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a trace; so, too, the tallow with which the axles of wheels are greased.
Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish but re-appear as properties of the product.
Raw material forms the substance of the product, but only after it has changed its form.
Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose the characteristic form with which they are clothed on entering the labour-process.
It is otherwise with the instruments of labour.
Tools, machines, workshops, and vessels, are of use in the labour-process, only so long as they retain their original shape, and are ready each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged.
And just as during their lifetime, that is to say, during the continued labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape independent of the product, so, too, they do after their death.
The lifetime of an instrument of labour, therefore, is spent in the repetition of a greater or less number of similar operations.
Its life may be compared with that of a human being.
Every day brings a man 24 hours nearer to his grave: but how many days he has still to travel on that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking at him.
This difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance offices from drawing, by means of the theory of averages, very accurate, and at the same time very profitable conclusions.
So it is with the instruments of labour.
It is known by experience how long on the average a machine of a particular kind will last.
Suppose its use-value in the labour-process to last only six days.
Then, on the average, it loses each day one-sixth of its use-value, and therefore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product.
The wear and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use-value, and the corresponding quantity of value they part with to the product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis.
It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never transfer more value to the product than they themselves lose during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use-value.
If such an instrument has no value to lose, if, in other words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no value to the product.
It helps to create use-value without contributing to the formation of exchange-value.
In this class are included all means of production supplied by Nature without human assistance, such as land, wind, water, metals in situ, and timber in virgin forests.
Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine is daily transferred to the day’s product.
At the same time, though with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole continues to take part in the labour-process.
Thus it appears, that one factor of the labour-process, a means of production, continually enters as a whole into that process, while it enters into the process of the formation of value by fractions only.
On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a whole in the formation of value, while into the labour-process it enters only bit by bit.
Suppose that in spinning cotton, the waste for every 115 lbs.
The destruction of this cotton is therefore a necessary condition in the production of the yarn.
And because it is a necessary condition, and for no other reason, the value of that cotton is transferred to the product.
The same holds good for every kind of refuse resulting from a labour-process, so far at least as such refuse cannot be further employed as a means in the production of new and independent use-values.
We have seen that the means of production transfer value to the new product, so far only as during the labour-process they lose value in the shape of their old use-value.
Therefore, the means of production can never add more value to the product than they themselves possess independently of the process in which they assist.
Its value is determined not by the labour-process into which it enters as a means of production, but by that out of which it has issued as a product.
In the labour-process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful properties, and could not, therefore, transfer any value to the product, unless it possessed such value previously.
While productive labour is changing the means of production into constituent elements of a new product, their value undergoes a metempsychosis.
It deserts the consumed body, to occupy the newly created one.
But this transmigration takes place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer.
So long as trade is good, the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take notice of this gratuitous gift of labour.
A violent interruption of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware of it.
As regards the means of production, what is really consumed is their use-value, and the consumption of this use-value by labour results in the product.
There is no consumption of their value, and it would therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced.
It is rather preserved; not by reason of any operation it undergoes itself in the process; but because the article in which it originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but vanishes into some other article.
Hence, in the value of the product, there is a reappearance of the value of the means of production, but there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value.
That which is produced is a new use-value in which the old exchange-value reappears.
It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-process, with labour-power in action.
This value is the surplus, of the total value of the product, over the portion of its value that is due to the means of production.
It is the only original bit of value formed during this process, the only portion of the value of the product created by this process.
Of course, we do not forget that this new value only replaces the money advanced by the capitalist in the purchase of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the necessaries of life.
The substitution of one value for another, is here effected by the creation of new value.
We know, however, from what has gone before, that the labour-process may continue beyond the time necessary to reproduce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for the value of the labour-power.
Instead of the six hours that are sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue for twelve hours.
The action of labour-power, therefore, not only reproduces its own value, but produces value over and above it.
This surplus-value is the difference between the value of the product and the value of the elements consumed in the formation of that product, in other words, of the means of production and the labour-power.
The surplus of the total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its constituent factors, is the surplus of the expanded capital over the capital originally advanced.
I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly, constant capital.
On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by labour-power, does, in the process of production, undergo an alteration of value.
It both reproduces the equivalent of its own value, and also produces an excess, a surplus-value, which may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances.
This part of capital is continually being transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude.
I therefore call it the variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital.
The definition of constant capital given above by no means excludes the possibility of a change of value in its elements.
Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, and the next day, in consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, a shilling a pound.
It is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent of the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the cotton by the spinning itself.
If the old cotton had never been spun, it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of at sixpence.
Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone through, the more certain is this result.
The value of a commodity, it is true, is determined by the quantity of labour contained in it, but this quantity is itself limited by social conditions.
As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may that of the instruments of labour, of the machinery, &c.
But here again, the change in value originates outside the process in which the machine is acting as a means of production.
Once engaged in this process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it possesses apart from the process.
The difference is s or a surplus-value of £90.
Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely.
The two things compared are, the value of the product and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of production.
Since this remainder plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present leave it on one side.
To introduce it into the calculation would make no difference.
The difference of these two sums, or the surplus-value, would still be £90.
We know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to, and merely re-appears in the product.
This component of the value of the product, i.
The capital advanced would, in this case, not have expanded its value.
This is merely an application of a mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitudes, related to each other by the symbols of addition and subtraction only.
A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable capital.
The portion of the capital invested in the purchase of labour-power is a definite quantity of materialised labour, a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased.
But in the process of production the place of the £90 is taken by the labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced by living labour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable.
The result is the reproduction of v plus an increment of v.
From the point of view then of capitalist production, the whole process appears as the spontaneous variation of the originally constant value, which is transformed into labour-power.
Both the process and its result, appear to be owing to this value.
If, therefore, such expressions as “£90 variable capital,” or “so much self-expanding value,” appear contradictory, this is only because they bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in capitalist production.
At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the constant capital to zero.
Yet it is what we do every day.
We shall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio exhaustively.
In order to enable one portion of a capital to expand its value by being converted into labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into means of production.
In order that variable capital may perform its function, constant capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a proportion given by the special technical conditions of each labour-process.
The circumstance, however, that retorts and other vessels, are necessary to a chemical process, does not compel the chemist to notice them in the result of his analysis.
Neither the nature, nor the value of this material is of any importance.
The only requisite is that there be a sufficient supply to absorb the labour expended in the process of production.
In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero.
The capital advanced is consequently reduced from c + v to v, and instead of the value of the product (c + v) + s we have now the value produced (v + s).
This sum of £90 or s expresses the absolute quantity of surplus-value produced.
The relative quantity produced, or the increase per cent of the variable capital, is determined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital, or is expressed by s/v.
This relative increase in the value of the variable capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus-value, I call, “The rate of surplus-value.
We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the labour-process, produces only the value of his labour-power, that is, the value of his means of subsistence.
If the value of those necessaries represent on an average the expenditure of six hours’ labour, the workman must on an average work for six hours to produce that value.
It is owing to this fact, that the production of the new value of three shillings takes the semblance of a mere reproduction.
He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms of a creation out of nothing.
Both ratios, s/v and (surplus labour)/(necessary labour), express the same thing in different ways; in the one case by reference to materialised, incorporated labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour.
The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of the labourer by the capitalist.
We assumed in our example, that the value of the product = £410 const.
This relation is here one of equality, the rate being 100%.
Hence, it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the day for himself, the other half for the capitalist.
The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is therefore, shortly, as follows.
We take the total value of the product and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, equal to zero.
What remains, is the only value that has, in the process of producing the commodity, been actually created.
If the amount of surplus-value be given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder, to find the variable capital.
And vice versâ, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus-value.
If both be given, we have only to perform the concluding operation, viz.
Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by means of a few examples, to exercise the reader in the application of the novel principles underlying it.
Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £10 weekly.
Therefore the constant portion of the value of the week’s product is £378.
We put the constant part of the value of the product = 0, as it plays no part in the creation of value.
Jacob gives the following calculation for the year 1815.
Owing to the previous adjustment of several items it is very imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient.
In it he assumes the price of wheat to be 8s.
Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its value, we here find the surplus-value distributed under the various heads of profit, interest, rent, &c.
The labourer employs more than one half of his working-day in producing the surplus-value, which different persons, under different pretexts, share amongst themselves.
Let us now return to the example by which we were shown how the capitalist converts money into capital.
The total value then of the 20 lbs.
Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs.
Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lbs.
The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom either of the value of the auxiliary materials and implements, or of the value newly created in the process.
We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight-tenths of the product, or 16 lbs.
In this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lbs.
It has now been shown how the various component parts of the value of the product, parts that differ functionally from each other, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product itself.
In the preceding investigation we have treated the total product as the final result, ready for use, of a working-day of 12 hours.
That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such miracles, and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove them, is vouched for by the following incident of historical celebrity.
One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W.
The manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only against the newly passed Factory Act, but against the still more menacing Ten-hours’ agitation.
With their usual practical acuteness, they had found out that the learned Professor “wanted a good deal of finishing;” it was this discovery that caused them to write for him.
On his side the Professor has embodied the lecture he received from the Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet, entitled: “Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton manufacture.
The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned once a year, and gross profits to be 15 per cent.
His answer would simply have been: — Gentlemen!
You gain just as much as you lose.
Your work-people will in future spend one hour and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been advanced.
According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but one produces his wages, and in the last hour your surplus-value or net profit.
Now, since in equal periods he produces equal values, the produce of the last hour but one, must have the same value as that of the last hour.
Further, it is only while he labours that he produces any value at all, and the amount of his labour is measured by his labour-time.
This you say, amounts to 11½ hours a day.
He employs one portion of these 11½ hours, in producing or replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in producing your net profit.
We now come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention!
The last working-hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither more nor less.
How then can the spinner produce in one hour, in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5¾ hours’ labour?
The truth is that he performs no such miracle.
The use-value produced by him in one hour, is a definite quantity of yarn.
You are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his working-day, in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the machinery, and so on.
On the contrary, it is because his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he spins, that the values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their own accord.
This result is owing to the quality of his labour, not to its quantity.
In speaking of payment of labour, instead of payment of labour-power, I only talk your own slang.
But this dreadful “last hour,” about which you have invented more stories than have the millenarians about the day of judgment, is “all bosh.
And now, gentlemen, “farewell, and may we meet again in yonder better world, but not before.
Senior invented the battle cry of the “last hour” in 1836.
The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, (one tenth of the 20 lbs.
The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.
We started with the supposition that labour-power is bought and sold at its value.
Its value, like that of all other commodities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its production.
The necessary part of his working-day amounts to 6 hours, and is, therefore, caeteris paribus [other things being equal], a given quantity.
But with this, the extent of the working-day itself is not yet given.
Let us assume that the line A–––B represents the length of the necessary working-time, say 6 hours.
The extension B—–C of the line A—–B represents the length of the surplus-labour.
Since further the ratio (surplus working-time)/(necessary working-time), determines the rate of the surplus-value, the latter is given by the ratio of B—-C to A—-B.
On the other hand, the rate of surplus-value alone would not give us the extent of the working-day.
It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the working-day, necessary-labour and surplus-labour time, were equal in extent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was.
The working-day is thus not a constant, but a variable quantity.
One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the working-time required for the reproduction of the labour-power of the labourer himself.
But its total amount varies with the duration of the surplus-labour.
The working-day is, therefore, determinable, but is, per se, indeterminate.
Although the working-day is not a fixed, but a fluent quantity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain limits.
The minimum limit is, however, not determinable; of course, if we make the extension line B—‑C or the surplus-labour = 0, we have a minimum limit, i.
On the basis of capitalist production, however, this necessary labour can form a part only of the working-day; the working-day itself can never be reduced to this minimum.
On the other hand, the working-day has a maximum limit.
It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain point.
This maximum limit is conditioned by two things.
Within the 24 hours of the natural day a man can expend only a definite quantity of his vital force.
A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours.
During part of the day this force must rest, sleep; during another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to feed, wash, and clothe himself.
Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of the working-day encounters moral ones.
The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of which are conditioned by the general state of social advancement.
The variation of the working-day fluctuates, therefore, within physical and social bounds.
But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic nature, and allow the greatest latitude.
The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate.
To him its use-value belongs during one working-day.
He has thus acquired the right to make the labourer work for him during one day.
At all events, less than a natural day.
The capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule [the outermost limit], the necessary limit of the working-day.
But capital has one single life impulse, the tendency to create value and surplus-value, to make its constant factor, the means of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of surplus-labour.
Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it sucks.
The time during which the labourer works, is the time during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power he has purchased of him.
If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he robs the capitalist.
The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the exchange of commodities.
He, like all other buyers, seeks to get the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commodity.
The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value, and a value greater than its own.
That which on your side appears a spontaneous expansion of capital, is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power.
You and I know on the market only one law, that of the exchange of commodities.
And the consumption of the commodity belongs not to the seller who parts with it, but to the buyer, who acquires it.
To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour-power.
But by means of the price that you pay for it each day, I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to sell it again.
You preach to me constantly the gospel of “saving” and “abstinence.
I will, like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and abstain from all foolish waste of it.
I will each day spend, set in motion, put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal duration, and healthy development.
By an unlimited extension of the working-day, you may in one day use up a quantity of labour-power greater than I can restore in three.
What you gain in labour I lose in substance.
The use of my labour-power and the spoliation of it are quite different things.
You pay me for one day’s labour-power, whilst you use that of 3 days.
That is against our contract and the law of exchanges.
That which seems to throb there is my own heart-beating.
I demand the normal working-day because I, like every other seller, demand the value of my commodity.
We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no limit to the working-day, no limit to surplus-labour.
The capitalist maintains his rights as a purchaser when he tries to make the working-day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two working-days out of one.
There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges.
Hence is it that in the history of capitalist production, the determination of what is a working-day, presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between collective capital, i.
Hence in antiquity over-work becomes horrible only when the object is to obtain exchange-value in its specific independent money-form; in the production of gold and silver.
Compulsory working to death is here the recognised form of over-work.
But as soon as people, whose production still moves within the lower forms of slave-labour, corvée-labour, &c.
Hence the negro labour in the Southern States of the American Union preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as production was chiefly directed to immediate local consumption.
It was no longer a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of useful products.
It was now a question of production of surplus-labour itself: So was it also with the corvée, e.
The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the Danubian Principalities with the same greed in English factories has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvée has an independent and palpable form.
But this is not evident on the surface.
Surplus-labour and necessary labour glide one into the other.
I can, therefore, express the same relationship by saying, e.
The necessary labour which the Wallachian peasant does for his own maintenance is distinctly marked off from his surplus-labour on behalf of the Boyard.
The one he does on his own field, the other on the seignorial estate.
Both parts of the labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one with the other.
In the corvée the surplus-labour is accurately marked off from the necessary labour.
This, however, can make no difference with regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour to necessary labour.
Three days’ surplus-labour in the week remain three days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, whether it be called corvée or wage-labour.
But in the capitalist the greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an unlimited extension of the working-day, in the Boyard more simply in a direct hunting after days of corvée.
In the Danubian Principalities the corvée was mixed up with rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but it formed the most important tribute paid to the ruling class.
Where this was the case, the corvée rarely arose from serfdom; serfdom much more frequently on the other hand took origin from the corvée.
This is what took place in the Roumanian provinces.
Their original mode of production was based on community of the soil, but not in the Slavonic or Indian form.
Part of the land was cultivated in severalty as freehold by the members of the community, another part — ager publicus — was cultivated by them in common.
The products of this common labour served partly as a reserve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a public store for providing the costs of war, religion, and other common expenses.
In course of time military and clerical dignitaries usurped, along with the common land, the labour spent upon it.
The labour of the free peasants on their common land was transformed into corvée for the thieves of the common land.
This corvée soon developed into a servile relationship existing in point of fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal under presence of abolishing serfdom.
The code of the corvée, which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of course dictated by the Boyards themselves.
Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the Danubian provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout Europe.
To this had to be added the so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for extraordinary occasions.
In proportion to the size of its population, every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the jobagie.
This additional corvée is estimated at 14 days for each Wallachian peasant.
Thus the prescribed corvée amounts to 56 working-days yearly.
This is, however, only the legally prescribed corvée.
And in a spirit yet more “liberal” than the English Factory Acts, the “Règlement organique” has known how to facilitate its own evasion.
The legal day’s work for some kinds of agricultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins in May and ends in October.
If the Règlement organique of the Danubian provinces was a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour which every paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative expression of the same greed.
These acts curb the passion of capital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by forcibly limiting the working-day by state regulations, made by a state that is ruled by capitalist-and landlord.
Apart from the working-class movement that daily grew more threatening, the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which spread guano over the English fields.
The same blind eagerness for plunder that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the other, torn up by the roots the living force of the nation.
Periodical epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the diminishing military standard in Germany and France.
Certain guardians of these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the Home Secretary, whose reports are published half-yearly, by order of Parliament.
They give regular and official statistics of the capitalistic greed for surplus-labour.
Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors.
“The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a.
He works for a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 2 p.
“Five minutes a day’s increased work, multiplied by weeks, are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year.
“An additional hour a day gained by small instalments before 6 a.
Crises during which production is interrupted and the factories work “short time,” i.
The less business there is, the more profit has to be made on the business done.
The less time spent in work, the more of that time has to be turned into surplus labour-time.
“For a great part of the time,” says Mr.
Howell, “owing to the depression of trade, many factories were altogether closed, and a still greater number were working short time.
In cases where the additional time is gained by a multiplication of small thefts in the course of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors making out a case.
It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus-value by surplus-labour, is no secret.
“If you allow me,” said a highly respectable master to me, “to work only ten minutes in the day over-time, you put one thousand a year in my pocket.
All individual distinctions are merged in those of “full-timers” and “half-timers.
Now, let us cast a glance at certain branches of production in which the exploitation of labour is either free from fetters to this day, or was so yesterday.
What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to petition that the period of labour for men shall be diminished to eighteen hours a day?
We declaim against the Virginian and Carolinian cotton-planters.
The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, been the subject of three parliamentary inquiries.
Scriven’s Report of 1841 to the “ Children’s Employment Commissioners,” in the report of Dr.
He “ran moulds” (carried ready-moulded articles into the drying-room, afterwards bringing back the empty mould) from the beginning.
He came to work every day in the week at 6 a.
“I work till 9 o’clock at night six days in the week.
I have done so seven or eight weeks.
Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old!
Murray, 12 years of age, says: “I turn jigger, and run moulds.
I worked all night last night, till 6 o’clock this morning.
I have not been in bed since the night before last.
There were eight or nine other boys working last night.
I do not get any more for working at night.
“I have not always an hour (for dinner).
I have only half an hour sometimes; on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday.
Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the pottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is extraordinarily short.
Although in the district of Stoke, only 36.
“Each successive generation of potters is more dwarfed and less robust than the preceding one.
“Since he began to practice among the potters 25 years ago, he had observed a marked degeneration especially shown in diminution of stature and breadth.
These statements are taken from the report of Dr.
From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: Dr.
“The potters as a class, both men and women, represent a degenerated population, both physically and morally.
But of all diseases they are especially prone to chest-disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and asthma.
One form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter’s asthma, or potter’s consumption.
That the ‘degenerescence’ of the population of this district is not even greater than it is, is due to the constant recruiting from the adjacent country, and intermarriages with more healthy races.
And all that holds of the potteries in England is true of those in Scotland.
The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to the match itself.
Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly developed in England, and has extended especially amongst the thickly populated parts of London as well as in Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich, Newcastle and Glasgow.
With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna physician in 1845 discovered to be a disease peculiar to lucifer-matchmakers.
Half the workers are children under thirteen, and young persons under eighteen.
Dante would have found the worst horrors of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture.
In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing).
The most active business months are from the beginning of October to the end of April.
During this time the work goes on fast and furious without intermission from 6 a.
“Last winter six out of nineteen girls were away from ill-health at one time from over-work.
I have to bawl at them to keep them awake.
Duffy: “I have seen when the children could none of them keep their eyes open for the work; indeed, none of us could.
I used to cry with sore feet every night last winter.
I have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, for he could not leave it or stop.
Smith take no meals himself during 10½ hours?
Smith, who is so extremely devoted to the pluralis majestatis [the Royal “we,” i.
Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in the Borough, “which allowed work between, say 6 a.
But,” he adds sympathetically, “I can understand the loss of time not being liked.
The report of the Commission opines with naïveté that the fear of some “leading firms” of losing time, i.
But capital, as was said earlier, is at first indifferent as to the technical character of the labour-process; it begins by taking it just as it finds it.
At all events the Committee had directed the attention of the public to its “daily bread,” and therefore to the baking trade.
At the same time in public meetings and in petitions to Parliament rose the cry of the London journeymen bakers against their over-work, &c.
Tremenheere, also a member of the Commission of 1863 several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of Inquiry.
His report, together with the evidence given, roused not the heart of the public but its stomach.
The last clause speaks volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely line of business.
“The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, at about eleven at night.
When the business of making the bread, rolls, &c.
During what is called ‘the London season,’ the operatives belonging to the ‘full-priced’ bakers at the West End of the town, generally begin work at 11 p.
They may have, after they have done their work, sometimes five or six, sometimes only four or five hours’ sleep before they begin again.
On Fridays they always begin sooner, some about ten o’clock, and continue in some cases, at work, either in making or delivering the bread up to 8 p.
If they send it out, which is not common, except as supplying chandlers’ shops, they usually employ other hands for that purpose.
It is not their practice to deliver bread from house to house.
Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the “underselling” masters.
“The unpaid labour of the men was made the source whereby the competition was carried on.
Thus was laid the foundation of capitalistic production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the working-day and of night-labour, although the latter only since 1824 gained a serious footing, even in London.
Nevertheless, the baking trade is always overwhelmed with applicants.
The sources of the supply of these labour-powers to London are Scotland, the western agricultural districts of England, and Germany.
As a result of this movement, day-labour alone was successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny, Clonmel, Waterford, &c.
“In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are demonstrated to be excessive, the movement has been defeated by the opposition of the master bakers, the miller bakers being the greatest opponents.
The example of Limerick led to a retrogression in Ennis and Tipperary.
In Cork, where the strongest possible demonstration of feeling took place, the masters, by exercising their power of turning the men out of employment, have defeated the movement.
“The Committee believe that the hours of labour are limited by natural laws, which cannot be violated with impunity.
A tremendous railway accident has hurried hundreds of passengers into another world.
The negligence of the employee is the cause of the misfortune.
They declare with one voice before the jury that ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours a-day.
Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to see.
In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a paragraph with the “sensational” heading, “Death from simple over-work.
The old, often-told story, was once more recounted.
It was just now the height of the season.
It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales.
At night, they slept in pairs in one of the stifling holes into which the bedroom was divided by partitions of board.
And this was one of the best millinery establishments in London.
Mary Anne Walkley fell ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment of Madame Elise, having previously completed the work in hand.
“Mary Anne Walkley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded work-room, and a too small and badly ventilated bedroom.
“the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to fear that her death had been accelerated by over-work in an over-crowded workroom, &c.
“Our white slaves,” cried the Morning Star, the organ of the Free-traders, Cobden and Bright, “our white slaves, who are toiled into the grave, for the most part silently pine and die.
We will take the blacksmith as a type.
Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the best of human positions, physically speaking.
But we follow him into the city or town, and we see the stress of work on that strong man, and what then is his position in the death-rate of his country.
The occupation, instinctive almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch of human industry, is made by mere excess of work, the destroyer of the man.
Constant capital, the means of production, considered from the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only exist to absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional quantity of surplus-labour.
While they fail to do this, their mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they represent during the time they lie fallow, a useless advance of capital.
And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon as the intermission of their employment necessitates additional outlay at the recommencement of work.
The prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits of the natural day, into the night, only acts as a palliative.
It quenches only in a slight degree the vampire thirst for the living blood of labour.
To appropriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore, the inherent tendency of capitalist production.
This alternation may be effected in various ways; e.
The workers consist of men and women, adults and children of both sexes.
In some branches of industry, the girls and women work through the night together with the males.
Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night-labour, the duration of the process of production, unbroken during the 24 hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding the limits of the normal working-day, e.
But the over-work beyond this amount is in many cases, to use the words of the English official report, “truly fearful.
These hours are, indeed, in some cases, not only cruelly but even incredibly long for children.
Amongst a number of boys it will, of course, not unfrequently happen that one or more are from some cause absent.
When this happens, their place is made up by one or more boys, who work in the other turn.
“At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a.
Slept on the floor of the furnace, over head, with an apron under me, and a bit of a jacket over me.
The two other days I have been here at 6 a.
Began there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning — always did, but was very gain [near] home, and could sleep at home.
Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours’ system.
The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the “cruel and incredible” extension of the working-day are naturally passed over in silence.
Capital only speaks of the system in its “normal” form.
“The boys do not suffer from the heat.
At the forges and in the rolling mills the hands work night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are day-work, i.
We could not well do without lads under 18 working by night.
But from the small proportion of boys that we employ, the subject (i.
With reference to the proposed alteration of the law, Mr.
But we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, at which boys could be dispensed with for night-work.
We think, however, that night-work in alternate weeks is no harm.
Naylor & Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the interest of their business, considered that periodically changed night-labour might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.
Our objections to not allowing boys under 18 to work at night, would be on account of the increase of expense, but this is the only reason.
The “Cyclops Steel and Iron Works,” of Messrs.
The managing director had handed in his evidence to the Government Commissioner, Mr.
Later he found it convenient to suppress the MS.
He remembered quite clearly that for the Messrs.
“Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys under 18 from working at night.
The chief would be the increase of cost from employing men instead of boys.
The men would not like so well not to have boys under them, as men would be less obedient.
Besides, boys must begin young to learn the trade.
Leaving day-work alone open to boys would not answer this purpose.
Why could not boys learn their handicraft in the day-time?
“Owing to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men would be separated half the time from their boys, and would lose half the profit which they make from them.
The training which they give to an apprentice is considered as part of the return for the boys’ labour, and thus enables the man to get it at a cheaper rate.
Each man would want half of this profit.
Sanderson would have to pay part of the wages of the adult men out of their own pockets instead of by the night-work of the boys.
Sanderson’s profit would thus fall to some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian reason why boys cannot learn their handicraft in the day.
In addition to this, it would throw night-labour on those who worked instead of the boys, which they would not be able to stand.
The difficulties in fact would be so great that they would very likely lead to the giving up of night-work altogether, and “as far as the work itself is concerned,” says E.
Sanderson, “this would suit as well, but —” But Messrs.
Sanderson have something else to make besides steel.
Steel-making is simply a pretext for surplus-value making.
But why should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by the other capitalists who only work during the day, and whose buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie “idle” during the night?
“It is true that there is this loss from machinery lying idle in those manufactories in which work only goes on by day.
But the use of furnaces would involve a further loss in our case.
What is the length of time during which capital may consume the labour-power whose daily value it buys?
How far may the working-day be extended beyond the working-time necessary for the reproduction of labour-power itself?
But in its blind unrestrainable passion, its were-wolf hunger for surplus-labour, capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely physical maximum bounds of the working-day.
It usurps the time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of the body.
It steals the time required for the consumption of fresh air and sunlight.
It reduces the sound sleep needed for the restoration, reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism, absolutely exhausted, renders essential.
Capital cares nothing for the length of life of labour-power.
All that concerns it is simply and solely the maximum of labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a working-day.
It attains this end by shortening the extent of the labourer’s life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased produce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility.
It produces also the premature exhaustion and death of this labour-power itself.
It extends the labourer’s time of production during a given period by shortening his actual life-time.
But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the commodities necessary for the reproduction of the worker, or for the keeping up of the working-class.
It would seem therefore that the interest of capital itself points in the direction of a normal working-day.
The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse.
If he loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be restored by new outlay in the slave-mart.
It is in tropical culture, where annual profits often equal the whole capital of plantations, that negro life is most recklessly sacrificed.
It is the agriculture of the West Indies, which has been for centuries prolific of fabulous wealth, that has engulfed millions of the African race.
Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur [It is of you that the story is told – Horace].
For slave-trade read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, for Africa, Germany.
We heard how over-work thinned the ranks of the bakers in London.
Nevertheless, the London labour-market is always over-stocked with German and other candidates for death in the bakeries.
Pottery, as we saw, is one of the shortest-lived industries.
No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour-market shows significant gaps.
But then the manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that they should send the “surplus-population” of the agricultural districts to the north, with the explanation “that the manufacturers would absorb and use it up.
An office was set up in Manchester, to which lists were sent of those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employment, and their names were registered in books.
This system had grown up unto a regular trade.
In 1860, ‘the cotton trade was at its zenith.
They applied to the ‘flesh agents, as they are called.
Those agents sent to the southern downs of England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the glades of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but they sought in vain.
“a deputation came up to London, and waited on the right hon.
Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with a view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses for the mills of Lancashire.
What experience shows to the capitalist generally is a constant excess of population, i.
Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of life of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society.
To the out-cry as to the physical and mental degradation, the premature death, the torture of over-work, it answers: Ought these to trouble us since they increase our profits?
But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the individual capitalist.
Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of external coercive laws having power over every individual capitalist.
The establishment of a normal working-day is the result of centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer.
The history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies.
Whilst the modern Factory Acts compulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes tried to lengthen it by compulsion.
It takes centuries ere the “free” labourer, thanks to the development of capitalistic production, agrees, i.
The first “Statute of Labourers” (23 Edward III.
The latter point, the only one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 1496 (Henry VII.
In winter, work was to last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same intervals.
Dinner is only to last 1 hour, and the “afternoon-sleep of half an hour” is only allowed between the middle of May and the middle of August.
In practice, however, the conditions were much more favourable to the labourers than in the statute-book.
It is true these regulations contained in the statute mentioned by Petty, apply also to apprentices.
Whereas our youth, here in England, being bred to nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very slow progress and require much longer time wherein to reach the perfection of accomplished artists.
One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, denounces this obstinacy in the most violent manner, another party defends the labourers.
I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from those great politicians, who contend for the perpetual slavery of the working people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all work and no play.
Have not the English boasted of the ingenuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers which have heretofore given credit and reputation to British wares in general?
To nothing more probably than the relaxation of the working people in their own way.
And what sort of workmanship could we expect from such hard-driven animals?
Many of them will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman will in five or six.
But if Englishmen are to be eternal drudges, ‘tis to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen.
As our people are famed for bravery in war, do we not say that it is owing to good English roast beef and pudding in their bellies, as well as their constitutional spirit of liberty?
Our labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the happiest of all our labouring poor, but the Dutch do this in manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people.
The French do so, when holidays do not intervene.
But our populace have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a birthright privilege of being more free and independent than in any country in Europe.
It is extremely dangerous to encourage mobs in a commercial state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the whole, are people with little or no property.
The cure will not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented to labour six days for the same sum which they now earn in four days.
Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the “House of Terror” of 1770!
The “House of Terror” for paupers of which the capitalistic soul of 1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years later in the shape of a gigantic “Workhouse” for the industrial worker himself.
And the ideal this time fades before the reality.
All bounds of morals and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down.
For 30 years, however, the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely nominal.
“The fact is, that prior to the Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all night, all day, or both ad libitum.
A normal working-day for modern industry only dates from the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool, flax, and silk factories.
“That there shall be allowed in the course of every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided.
Under the name of System of Relays, this “plan” was therefore carried out, so that, e.
In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the most barefaced way, ignored all the Acts as to children’s labour passed during the last twenty-two years, the pill was yet further gilded for them.
This “liberalism,” so full of consideration for “capital,” was the more noteworthy as.
“Legislation is necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.
But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agitation that went on for several years.
It turned chiefly on the age of those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours’ work, and were subject to a certain amount of compulsory education.
The more nearly the time approached for the coming into full force of the Factory Act, the fatal year 1836, the more wildly raged the mob of manufacturers.
In the meantime the pressure from without grew more threatening.
We do not pause longer on the beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later.
But this much is clear at the first glance: that this system annulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in the letter.
How could factory inspectors, with this complex bookkeeping in respect to each individual child or young person, enforce the legally determined work-time and the granting of the legal mealtimes?
In a great many of the factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again unpunished.
In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844), the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any control under the newly invented relay system.
In the meantime, however, circumstances had greatly changed.
The factory hands, especially since 1838, had made the Ten Hours’ Bill their economic, as they had made the Charter their political, election-cry.
They had entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and needed the workers to help them to victory.
They promised therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of bread, but the enactment of the Ten Hours’ Bill in the Free-trade millennium.
Thus they still less dared to oppose a measure intended only to make the law of 1833 a reality.
Threatened in their holiest interest, the rent of land, the Tories thundered with philanthropic indignation against the “nefarious practices” of their foes.
It places under protection a new category of workers, viz.
They were placed in every respect on the same footing as the young persons, their work time limited to twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &c.
For the first time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and officially the labour of adults.
“No instances have come to my knowledge of adult women having expressed any regret at their rights being thus far interfered with.
“That the hours of work of children and young persons shall be reckoned from the time when any child or young person shall begin to work in the morning.
“The time shall be regulated by a public clock,” for example, the nearest railway clock, by which the factory clock is to be set.
The occupier is to hang up a “legible” printed notice stating the hours for the beginning and ending of work and the times allowed for the several meals.
Children beginning work before 12 noon may not be again employed after I p.
The afternoon shift must therefore consist of other children than those employed in the morning.
No child or young person shall be employed more than five hours before I p.
No child or young person [or female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in any room in which any manufacturing process is then [i.
It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times, limits, pauses of the work were not at all the products of Parliamentary fancy.
They developed gradually out of circumstances as natural laws of the modern mode of production.
Their formulation, official recognition, and proclamation by the State, were the result of a long struggle of classes.
One of their first consequences was that in practice the working-day of the adult males in factories became subject to the same limitations, since in most processes of production the co-operation of the children.
The manufacturers, however, did not allow this “progress” without a compensating “retrogression.
The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the duties on cotton and other raw material; Free-trade proclaimed as the guiding star of legislation; in a word, the arrival of the millennium.
On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist movement and the 10 hours’ agitation reached their highest point.
They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge.
Despite the fanatical opposition of the army of perjured Free-traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours’ Bill, struggled for so long, went through Parliament.
And the workers themselves, under the presence that they had been taught by experience, were to help in the destruction of their own work.
The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by 10%.
This was done so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the new Free-trade era.
Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it, a reduction of wages of at least 25% took place.
Under such favourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory workers for the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun.
Neither lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt.
Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which workpeople were made to complain of “their oppression by the Act,” the petitioners themselves declared under oral examination, that their signatures had been extorted from them.
“They felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the Factory Act.
They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruthlessly sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to their humanitarian crotchet.
Factory Inspector Leonard Horner conducted in his own person, and through his sub-inspectors, many examinations of witnesses in the factories of Lancashire.
But the “ruthless” Factory Inspector Leonard Horner was again to the fore.
But meanwhile the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were imprisoned, and whose organisation was dismembered, had shaken the confidence of the English working-class in its own strength.
The working-class was everywhere proclaimed, placed under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects.
The manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselves.
They broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten Hours’ Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833 had aimed at restricting in some measure the “free” exploitation of labour-power.
It was a pro-slavery rebellion in miniature, carried on for over two years with a cynical recklessness, a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the rebel capitalist risked nothing except the skin of his “hands.
The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a part of, in many cases half of the young persons and women employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restoring the almost obsolete night-work.
The Ten Hours’ Act, they cried, leaves no other alternative.
Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals.
“Since the restriction of the hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers maintain, although they have not yet practically gone the whole length, that supposing the hours of work to be from 9 a.
And why should not the workpeople eat their dinner before 9 in the morning?
After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of 1844, and was therefore legal.
In order to make their work coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.
I crave the law, The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
But under the Ten Hours’ Act they were a “grievous hardship.
They were acting in the interests of the ill-advised operatives themselves, “in order to be able to pay them higher wages.
"This was the only possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten Hours’ Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain.
Is the great manufacturing interest of this country to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some little trouble to Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of Factories?
All these shifts naturally were of no avail.
The Factory Inspectors appealed to the Law Courts.
Stuart allowed the so-called relay system during the 15 hours of the factory day throughout Scotland, where it soon flourished again as of old.
The English Factory Inspectors, on the other hand, declared that the Home Secretary had no power dictatorially to suspend the law, and continued their legal proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion.
But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the Courts in this case the county magistrates — Cobbett’s “Great Unpaid” — acquitted them?
In these tribunals, the masters sat in judgment on themselves An example.
One Eskrigge, cotton-spinner, of the firm of Kershaw, Leese, & Co.
Receiving a refusal, he at first kept quiet.
Four Justices sat, among them three cottonspinners, at their head this same inevitable Eskrigge.
Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and now was of opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair for Eskrigge.
Supported by his own legal decision, he introduced the system at once into his own factory.
Of course, the composition of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law.
The crown lawyers declared the masters’ interpretation of the Act of 1848 absurd.
But the Saviours of Society would not allow themselves to be turned from their purpose.
I considered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the law.
Now, the same children and young persons were shifted from the spinning-room to the weaving-room, now, during 15 hours, from one factory to another.
Look, for example, at those schemes of the masters which the “respectable” press praised as models of “what a reasonable degree of care and method can accomplish.
As on the stage, the same persons had to appear in turns in the different scenes of the different acts.
But as an actor during the whole course of the play belongs to the stage, so the operatives, during 15 hours, belonged to the factory, without reckoning the time for going and coming.
Thus the hours of rest were turned into hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to the pot-house, and the girls to the brothel.
This was the gist of the matter, this the masters’ interpretation of the 10 hours’ law!
“By this decision, the Ten Hours’ Act was abolished.
But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed at once a revulsion.
The workpeople had hitherto offered a passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance.
They now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in threatening meetings.
The pretended Ten Hours’ Act was thus simple humbug, parliamentary cheating, had never existed!
The Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antagonism of classes had arrived at an incredible tension.
“On account of the contradictory decisions of the magistrates, a condition of things altogether abnormal and anarchical obtains.
One law holds in Yorkshire, another in Lancashire, one law in one parish of Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood.
And the first birthright of capital is equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists.
The work was to go on between 6 a.
By this an end was put to the relay system once for all.
For children’s labour, the Act of 1844 remained in force.
One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat.
The pretext was shown on subsequent investigation to be a deliberate lie.
“the delicate texture of the fabric in which they were employed, requiring a lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early introduction to these factories.
The children were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the sake of their hide and tallow.
Pretext: “Labour in silk mills was lighter than in mills for other fabrics, and less likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to health.
“the average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts and amongst the female part of the population is higher even than it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire.
Despite the protests of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months, the mischief continues to this hour.
Whilst the bill was under discussion, the Factory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the infamous abuses due to this anomaly.
In the background lurked the intention of screwing up, during prosperous years, the working-day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid of the children.
The experience of the three following years showed that such an attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the adult male operatives.
Since the passing of the first Factory Act half a century had elapsed.
Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original sphere in the “Printworks’ Act of 1845.
It allows males over 13 to be worked at will day and night.
However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in those great branches of industry which form the most characteristic creation of the modern mode of production.
This control appears, therefore, during the first half of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation.
The creation of a normal working-day is, therefore, the product of a protracted civil war, more or less dissembled, between the capitalist class and the working-class.
As the contest takes place in the arena of modern industry, it first breaks out in the home of that industry — England.
The English factory workers were the champions, not only of the English, but of the modern working-class generally, as their theorists were the first to throw down the gauntlet to the theory of capital.
The February revolution was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours’ law, which is much more deficient than its English original.
For all that, the French revolutionary method has its special advantages.
In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery disfigured a part of the Republic.
Labour cannot emancipate itself in the white skin where in the black it is branded.
But out of the death of slavery a new life at once arose.
The first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours’ agitation, that ran with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New England to California.
We are resolved to put forth all our strength until this glorious result is attained.
Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of the Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the conditions of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English Factory Inspector, R.
“Further steps towards a reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope of success, unless the hours of labour be limited, and the prescribed limit strictly enforced.
It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the process of production other than he entered.
In the market he stood as owner of the commodity “labour-power” face to face with other owners of commodities, dealer against dealer.
The contract by which he sold to the capitalist his labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white that he disposed of himself freely.
In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore the part of the working day necessary for the reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to be given, constant magnitudes.
This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time given of the surplus-value that the individual labourer furnishes to the capitalist in a definite period of time.
But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in money of the total value of all the labour-powers that he employs simultaneously.
Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value of one labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed.
With a given value of labour-power, therefore, the magnitude of the variable capital varies directly as the number of labourers employed simultaneously.
If the daily value of one labour-power = 3s.
In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s.
The mass of the surplus-value produced is therefore equal to the surplus-value which the working day of one labourer supplies multiplied by the number of labourers employed.
It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average labour-power is constant, but that the labourers employed by a capitalist are reduced to average labourers.
There are exceptional cases in which the surplus-value produced does not increase in proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then the value of the labour-power does not remain constant.
In the production of a definite mass of surplus-value, therefore the decrease of one factor may be compensated by the increase of the other.
If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate of surplus-value increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplus-value produced remains unaltered.
If on our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s.
Within certain limits therefore the supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent of the supply of labourers.
A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the surplus-value produced, by the two factors: rate of surplus-value and amount of variable capital advanced.
With a given rate of surplus-value, and a given value of labour-power, therefore, the masses of surplus-value produced vary directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced.
Now we know that the capitalist divides his capital into two parts.
One part he lays out in means of production.
This is the constant part of his capital.
The other part he lays out in living labour-power.
For, according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant capital reappears in the value of the product, but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly created value product.
This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appearance.
Classical economy, although not formulating the law, holds instinctively to it, because it is a necessary consequence of the general law of value.
It tries to rescue the law from collision with contradictory phenomena by a violent abstraction.
It will be seen later how the school of Ricardo has come to grief over this stumbling block.
Vulgar economy which, indeed, “has really learnt nothing,” here as everywhere sticks to appearances in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them.
In opposition to Spinoza, it believes that “ignorance is a sufficient reason.
The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a society, day in, day out, may be regarded as a single collective working day.
With a given length of this working day, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplus-value can only be increased by increasing the number of labourers, i.
The growth of population here forms the mathematical limit to the production of surplus-value by the total social capital.
On the contrary, with a given amount of population, this limit is formed by the possible lengthening of the working day.
It will, however, be seen in the following chapter that this law only holds for the form of surplus-value dealt with up to the present.
From the treatment of the production of surplus-value, so far, it follows that not every sum of money, or of value, is at pleasure transformable into capital.
To effect this transformation, in fact, a certain minimum of money or of exchange-value must be presupposed in the hands of the individual possessor of money or commodities.
The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power, employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplus-value.
He would, besides, only require the means of production sufficient for 8 working-hours.
On our supposition, however, he would have to employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplus-value appropriated daily, as well as, and no better than a labourer, i.
In this case the mere maintenance of life would be the end of his production, not the increase of wealth; but this latter is implied in capitalist production.
Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work himself, participate directly in the process of production, but he is then only a hybrid between capitalist and labourer, a “small master.
The possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced for production greatly exceeds the maximum of the middle ages.
Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered by Hegel (in his “Logic”), that merely quantitative differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative changes.
Certain spheres of production demand, even at the very outset of capitalist production, a minimum of capital that is not as yet found in the hands of single individuals.
Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital acquired the command over labour, i.
Personified capital, the capitalist takes care that the labourer does his work regularly and with the proper degree of intensity.
Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which compels the working class to do more work than the narrow round of its own life-wants prescribes.
At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the technical conditions in which it historically finds it.
It does not, therefore, change immediately the mode of production.
It was not less active in the old-fashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories.
It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans.
But it is different as soon as we deal with the process of production from the point of view of the process of creation of surplus-value.
The means of production are at once changed into means for the absorption of the labour of others.
It is now no longer the labourer that employs the means of production, but the means of production that employ the labourer.
Furnaces and workshops that stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are “a mere loss” to the capitalist.
Hence, furnaces and workshops constitute lawful claims upon the night-labour of the work-people.
The simple transformation of money into the material factors of the process of production, into means of production, transforms the latter into a title and a right to the labour and surpluslabour of others.
They amount to the most serious damage to the millowner’s prospects and property.
To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated capitalistic qualities of “four generations,” the value of the means of production, spindles, &c.
The rate of surplus-value and the length of the working day depended on the magnitude of this prolongation.
Though the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the total working day was variable.
Now suppose we have a working day whose length, and whose apportionment between necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given.
How now can the production of surplus-value be increased, i.
There would be an alteration, not in the length of the working day, but in its division into necessary labour-time and surplus labour-time.
On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the surplus-labour is given, when the length of the working day, and the value of labour-power, are given.
Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value of his labour-power is given; and given the value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour-time is given.
The duration of the surplus-labour, however, is arrived at, by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total working day.
Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it is not easy to see, how, under the given conditions, the surplus-labour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours.
No doubt, the capitalist can, instead of five shillings, pay the labourer four shillings and sixpence or even less.
This result, however, would be obtained only by lowering the wages of the labourer below the value of his labour-power.
With the four shillings and sixpence which he produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the necessaries of life than before, and consequently the proper reproduction of his labour-power is crippled.
The surplus-labour would in this case be prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal limits; its domain would be extended only by a usurpation of part of the domain of necessary labour-time.
Given the length of the working day, the prolongation of the surplus-labour must of necessity originate in the curtailment of the necessary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the former.
In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of labour-power should actually fall by one-tenth, in order that the necessary labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.
Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the same necessaries of life which were formerly produced in ten hours, can now be produced in nine hours.
But this is impossible without an increase in the productiveness of labour.
For example, suppose a shoe-maker, with given tools, makes in one working day of twelve hours, one pair of boots.
Hitherto in treating of surplus-value, arising from a simple prolongation of the working day, we have assumed the mode of production to be given and invariable.
The technical and social conditions of the process, and consequently the very mode of production must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of labour can be increased.
By that means alone can the value of labour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working day necessary for the reproduction of that value, be shortened.
The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working day, I call absolute surplus-value.
On the other hand, the surplus-value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two components of the working day, I call relative surplus-value.
But the value of a commodity is determined, not only by the quantity of labour which the labourer directly bestows upon that commodity, but also by the labour contained in the means of production.
For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends not only on the cobbler’s labour, but also on the value of the leather, wax, thread, &c.
But an increase in the productiveness of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the necessaries of life, nor the means of production for such necessaries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed.
The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto fall in the value of labour-power, a fall proportional to the extent of that commodity’s employment in the reproduction of labour-power.
Shirts, for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of many.
This latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time necessary for its reproduction; the total decrease being the sum of all the different curtailments of labour-time effected in those various and distinct industries.
This general result is treated, here, as if it were the immediate result directly aimed at in each individual case.
Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the productiveness of labour he by no means necessarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and shortening, pro tanto the necessary labour-time.
But it is only in so far as he ultimately contributes to this result, that he assists in raising the general rate of surplus-value.
The general and necessary tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of manifestation.
Nevertheless, for the better comprehension of the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the following remarks, in which we assume nothing more than the results we have already obtained.
If one hour’s labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings will be produced in a working day of 12 hours.
Let the value of the means of production used up in each article be sixpence.
Under these circumstances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the means of production, and sixpence for the value newly added in working with those means.
Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the day’s labour creates, as before, a new value of six shillings and no more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many articles.
The individual value of these articles is now below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour-time than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average social conditions.
Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one working day, the demand must be double what it was, i.
Other things being equal, his commodities can command a more extended market only by a diminution of their prices.
He will therefore sell them above their individual but under their social value, say at tenpence each.
By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each.
This augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by him, whether his commodities belong or not to the class of necessary means of subsistence that participate in determining the general value of labour-power.
Hence, independently of this latter circumstance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheapen his commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour.
Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus-value arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus-labour.
But the capitalist now produces 24 articles, which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty shillings in all.
The same result may be arrived at in the following way.
The value of the product of the working day of 12 hours is twenty shillings.
Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to the value of the means of production, a value that merely re-appears.
There remain eight shillings, which are the expression in money, of the value newly created during the working day.
This sum is greater than the sum in which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours of the latter labour are expressed by six shillings only.
The exceptionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour of the same kind.
His surplus-labour is, therefore, increased by 2½ hours, and the surplus-value he produces grows from one, into three shillings.
Hence, the capitalist who applies the improved method of production, appropriates to surplus-labour a greater portion of the working day, than the other capitalists in the same trade.
He does individually, what the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing relative surplus-value, do collectively.
The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the productiveness of labour.
And so, too, is the value of labour-power, because it depends on the values of commodities.
Relative surplus-value is, on the contrary, directly proportional to that productiveness.
It rises with rising and falls with falling productiveness.
Ten hours were necessary for the reproduction of the value of the labour-power; now only six are required.
Four hours have been set free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus-labour.
Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination and constant tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to cheapen commodities, and by such cheapening to cheapen the labourer himself.
The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the capitalist.
What alone interests him, is the surplus-value that dwells in it, and is realisable by sale.
Realisation of the surplus-value necessarily carries with it the refunding of the value that was advanced.
A riddle with which Quesnay, one of the founders of Political Economy, tormented his opponents, and to which they could give him no answer.
And yet, you believe that the production of wealth, which arises from the labour of the workpeople, consists in the augmentation of the exchange-value of their products.
The shortening of the working day is, therefore, by no means what is aimed at, in capitalist production, when labour is economised by increasing its productiveness.
It is only the shortening of the labour-time, necessary for the production of a definite quantity of commodities, that is aimed at.
How far this result is also attainable, without cheapening commodities, will appear from an examination of the particular modes of producing relative surplus-value, to which examination we now proceed.
The workshop of the medieval master handicraftsman is simply enlarged.
At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative.
We have shown that the surplus-value produced by a given capital is equal to the surplus-value produced by each workman multiplied by the number of workmen simultaneously employed.
The number of workmen in itself does not affect, either the rate of surplus-value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power.
Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes place.
The labour realised in value, is labour of an average social quality; is consequently the expenditure of average labour-power.
Any average magnitude, however, is merely the average of a number of separate magnitudes all of one kind, but differing as to quantity.
In every industry, each individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, differs from the average labourer.
These individual differences, or “errors” as they are called in mathematics, compensate one another, and vanish, whenever a certain minimum number of workmen are employed together.
The celebrated sophist and sycophant, Edmund Burke, goes so far as to make the following assertion, based on his practical observations as a farmer; viz.
But, however that may be, it is clear, that the collective working-day of a large number of workmen simultaneously employed, divided by the number of these workmen, gives one day of average social labour.
For example, let the working-day of each individual be 12 hours.
From the point of view, however, of the capitalist who employs these 12 men, the working-day is that of the whole dozen.
It would either be not saleable at all, or only at something below the average value of labour-power.
A fixed minimum of efficiency in all labour is therefore assumed, and we shall see, later on, that capitalist production provides the means of fixing this minimum.
Nevertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, although on the other hand the capitalist has to pay the average value of labour-power.
Of the six small masters, one would therefore squeeze out more than the average rate of surplus-value, another less.
The inequalities would be compensated for the society at large, but not for the individual masters.
Even without an alteration in the system of working, the simultaneous employment of a large number of labourers effects a revolution in the material conditions of the labour-process.
On the one hand, the exchange-value of these means of production is not increased; for the exchange-value of a commodity is not raised by its use-value being consumed more thoroughly and to greater advantage.
On the other hand, they are used in common, and therefore on a larger scale than before.
A room where twenty weavers work at twenty looms must be larger than the room of a single weaver with two assistants.
Owing to this, the value of a part of the constant capital falls, and in proportion to the magnitude of the fall, the total value of the commodity also falls.
The effect is the same as if the means of production had cost less.
The economy in their application is entirely owing to their being consumed in common by a large number of workmen.
A portion of the instruments of labour acquires this social character before the labour-process itself does so.
Economy in the use of the means of production has to be considered under two aspects.
First, as cheapening commodities, and thereby bringing about a fall in the value of labour-power.
Secondly, as altering the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced, i.
The march of our analysis compels this splitting up of the subject-matter, a splitting up that is quite in keeping with the spirit of capitalist production.
When numerous labourers work together side by side, whether in one and the same process, or in different but connected processes, they are said to co-operate, or to work in co-operation.
Not only have we here an increase in the productive power of the individual, by means of co-operation, but the creation of a new power, namely, the collective power of masses.
The reason of this is that man is, if not as Aristotle contends, a political, at all events a social animal.
The object is carried over the same distance in a shorter time.
Again, a combination of labour occurs whenever a building, for instance, is taken in hand on different sides simultaneously; although here also the co-operating masons are doing the same, or the same kind of work.
The reason is, that a body of men working in concert has hands and eyes both before and behind, and is, to a certain degree, omnipresent.
The various parts of the work progress simultaneously.
If the work be complicated, then the mere number of the men who co-operate allows of the various operations being apportioned to different hands, and, consequently, of being carried on simultaneously.
The time necessary for the completion of the whole work is thereby shortened.
In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by the nature of the process, during which certain definite results must be obtained.
In these cases, the time that ought to be taken by the process is prescribed, just as it is in herring fishing.
The shortness of the time allowed for the work is compensated for by the large mass of labour thrown upon the field of production at the decisive moment.
On the other hand, while extending the scale of production, it renders possible a relative contraction of the arena.
The combined working-day produces, relatively to an equal sum of isolated working-days, a greater quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the production of a given useful effect.
When the labourer co-operates systematically with others, he strips off the fetters of his individuality, and develops the capabilities of his species.
As a general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being brought together: their assemblage in one place is a necessary condition of their co-operation.
Hence wage-labourers cannot co-operate, unless they are employed simultaneously by the same capital, the same capitalist, and unless therefore their labour-powers are bought simultaneously by him.
The payment of 300 workmen at once, though only for one day, requires a greater outlay of capital, than does the payment of a smaller number of men, week by week, during a whole year.
And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital.
The value and quantity of the instruments of labour used in common do not, it is true, increase at the same rate as the number of workmen, but they do increase very considerably.
We now see that a certain minimum amount is a necessary condition for the conversion of numerous isolated and independent processes into one combined social process.
We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital was only a formal result of the fact, that the labourer, instead of working for himself, works for and consequently under the capitalist.
By the co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, the sway of capital develops into a requisite for carrying on the labour-process itself, into a real requisite of production.
That a capitalist should command on the field of production, is now as indispensable as that a general should command on the field of battle.
A single violin player is his own conductor; an orchestra requires a separate one.
The work of directing, superintending, and adjusting, becomes one of the functions of capital, from the moment that the labour under the control of capital, becomes co-operative.
Once a function of capital, it acquires special characteristics.
The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist production, is to extract the greatest possible amount of surplus-value, and consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest possible extent.
As the number of the co-operating labourers increases, so too does their resistance to the domination of capital, and with it, the necessity for capital to overcome this resistance by counterpressure.
Moreover, the co-operation of wage labourers is entirely brought about by the capital that employs them.
As co-operation extends its scale, this despotism takes forms peculiar to itself.
The work of supervision becomes their established and exclusive function.
When comparing the mode of production of isolated peasants and artisans with production by slave-labour, the political economist counts this labour of superintendence among the faux frais of production.
It is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is a capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of industry because he is a capitalist.
The leadership of industry is an attribute of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general and judge, were attributes of landed property.
The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has done bargaining for its sale with the capitalist; and he can sell no more than what he has i.
He is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, without letting them co-operate.
He pays them the value of 100 independent labour-powers, but he does not pay for the combined labour-power of the hundred.
Being independent of each other, the labourers are isolated persons, who enter into relations with the capitalist, but not with one another.
This co-operation begins only with the labour-process, but they have then ceased to belong to themselves.
On entering that process, they become incorporated with capital.
As co-operators, as members of a working organism, they are but special modes of existence of capital.
Hence, the productive power developed by the labourer when working in co-operation, is the productive power of capital.
This power is developed gratuitously, whenever the workmen are placed under given conditions, and it is capital that places them under such conditions.
The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in the gigantic structures of the ancient Asiatics, Egyptians, Etruscans, &c.
The number of the labourers and the concentration of their efforts sufficed.
We see mighty coral reefs rising from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm land, yet each individual depositor is puny, weak, and contemptible.
It is that confinement of the revenues which feed them, to one or a few hands, which makes such undertakings possible.
This power of Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &c.
Such co-operation is distinguished from capitalistic co-operation by both of the above characteristics.
The sporadic application of co-operation on a large scale in ancient times, in the middle ages, and in modern colonies, reposes on relations of dominion and servitude, principally on slavery.
The capitalistic form, on the contrary, pre-supposes from first to last, the free wage-labourer, who sells his labour-power to capital.
Historically, however, this form is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture and to the carrying on of independent handicrafts whether in guilds or not.
It is the first change experienced by the actual labour-process, when subjected to capital.
The simultaneous employment of a large number of wage-labourers, in one and the same process, which is a necessary condition of this change, also forms the starting-point of capitalist production.
This point coincides with the birth of capital itself.
Simple co-operation is always the prevailing form, in those branches of production in which capital operates on a large scale, and division of labour and machinery play but a subordinate part.
That co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes its typical form in manufacture, and is the prevalent characteristic form of the capitalist process of production throughout the manufacturing period properly so called.
A carriage, for example, was formerly the product of the labour of a great number of independent artificers, such as wheelwrights, harness-makers, tailors, locksmiths, upholsterers, turners, fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, polishers, gilders, &c.
In the manufacture of carriages, however, all these different artificers are assembled in one building where they work into one another’s hands.
It is true that a carriage cannot be gilt before it has been made.
But if a number of carriages are being made simultaneously, some may be in the hands of the gilders while others are going through an earlier process.
So far, we are still in the domain of simple co-operation, which finds its materials ready to hand in the shape of men and things.
But very soon an important change takes place.
The tailor, the locksmith, and the other artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradually loses, through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft.
But, on the other hand, his activity now confined in one groove, assumes the form best adapted to the narrowed sphere of action.
At first, carriage manufacture is a combination of various independent handicrafts.
In the same way, cloth manufacture, as also a whole series of other manufactures, arose by combining different handicrafts together under the control of a single capitalist.
This is co-operation in its most elementary form.
Each of these artificers (with the help, perhaps, of one or two apprentices), makes the entire commodity, and he consequently performs in succession all the operations necessary for its production.
He still works in his old handicraft-like way.
But very soon external circumstances cause a different use to be made of the concentration of the workmen on one spot, and of the simultaneousness of their work.
An increased quantity of the article has perhaps to be delivered within a given time.
This accidental repartition gets repeated, develops advantages of its own, and gradually ossifies into a systematic division of labour.
The commodity, from being the individual product of an independent artificer, becomes the social product of a union of artificers, each of whom performs one, and only one, of the constituent partial operations.
The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild was the cornerstone on which the English needle manufacture was raised.
The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of handicrafts, is therefore two-fold.
On the one hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces division of labour into a process of production, or further develops that division; on the other hand, it unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate.
But whatever may have been its particular starting-point, its final form is invariably the same – a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings.
For a proper understanding of the division of labour in manufacture, it is essential that the following points be firmly grasped.
First, the decomposition of a process of production into its various successive steps coincides, here, strictly with the resolution of a handicraft into its successive manual operations.
Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co-operation, and many of its advantages[*] spring from the general character of co-operation, and not from this particular form of it.
Consequently, he takes less time in doing it, than the artificer who performs a whole series of operations in succession.
But the collective labourer, who constitutes the living mechanism of manufacture, is made up solely of such specialised detail labourers.
Hence, in comparison with the independent handicraft, more is produced in a given time, or the productive power of labour is increased.
Moreover, when once this fractional work is established as the exclusive function of one person, the methods it employs become perfected.
The workman’s continued repetition of the same simple act, and the concentration of his attention on it, teach him by experience how to attain the desired effect with the minimum of exertion.
“The muslins of Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece goods of Coromandel in brilliant and durable colours, have never been surpassed.
Yet they are produced without capital, machinery, division of labour, or any of those means which give such facilities to the manufacturing interest of Europe.
It is only the special skill accumulated from generation to generation, and transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does to the spider, this proficiency.
And yet the work of such a Hindu weaver is very complicated, compared with that of a manufacturing labourer.
An artificer, who performs one after another the various fractional operations in the production of a finished article, must at one time change his place, at another his tools.
The transition from one operation to another interrupts the flow of his labour, and creates, so to say, gaps in his working-day.
These gaps close up so soon as he is tied to one and the same operation all day long; they vanish in proportion as the changes in his work diminish.
The resulting increased productive power is owing either to an increased expenditure of labour-power in a given time i.
The extra expenditure of power, demanded by every transition from rest to motion, is made up for by prolonging the duration of the normal velocity when once acquired.
On the other hand, constant labour of one uniform kind disturbs the intensity and flow of a man’s animal spirits, which find recreation and delight in mere change of activity.
The productiveness of labour depends not only on the proficiency of the workman, but on the perfection of his tools.
Tools of the same kind, such as knives, drills, gimlets, hammers, &c.
The direction taken by this change is determined by the difficulties experienced in consequence of the unchanged form of the implement.
In Birmingham alone 500 varieties of hammers are produced, and not only is each adapted to one particular process, but several varieties often serve exclusively for the different operations in one and the same process.
The manufacturing period simplifies, improves, and multiplies the implements of labour, by adapting them to the exclusively special functions of each detail labourer.
It thus creates at the same time one of the material conditions for the existence of machinery, which consists of a combination of simple instruments.
The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest elements of manufacture.
Let us now turn to its aspect as a whole.
This double character arises from the nature of the article produced.
This article either results from the mere mechanical fitting together of partial products made independently, or owes its completed shape to a series of connected processes and manipulations.
It cannot, however, serve as an example of the first kind of genuine manufacture, for it is a structure produced by modern mechanical industry.
But a watch can; and William Petty used it to illustrate the division of labour in manufacture.
Only a few parts of the watch pass through several hands; and all these membra disjecta come together for the first time in the hand that binds them into one mechanical whole.
And even in the latter case the dial, the springs, and the case, are seldom made in the factory itself.
Nevertheless the position of this detail labourer who, though he works at home, does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, établisseur), is very different from that of the independent artificer, who works for his own customers.
In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, combines scattered handicrafts, it lessens the space by which the various phases of production are separated from each other.
The time taken in passing from one stage to another is shortened, so is the labour that effectuates this passage.
In comparison with a handicraft, productive power is gained, and this gain is owing to the general co-operative character of manufacture.
On the other hand, division of labour, which is the distinguishing principle of manufacture, requires the isolation of the various stages of production and their independence of each other.
The establishment and maintenance of a connexion between the isolated functions necessitates the incessant transport of the article from one hand to another, and from one process to another.
From the standpoint of modern mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth as a characteristic and costly disadvantage, and one that is immanent in the principle of manufacture.
On the other hand, if we look at the workshop as a whole, we see the raw material in all the stages of its production at the same time.
The different detail processes, which were successive in time, have become simultaneous, go on side by side in space.
Hence, production of a greater quantum of finished commodities in a given time.
On the other hand, it accomplishes this social organisation of the labour-process only by riveting each labourer to a single fractional detail.
The result of the labour of the one is the starting-point for the labour of the other.
The one workman therefore gives occupation directly to the other.
It is only on this assumption that the various supplementary labour-processes can proceed uninterruptedly, simultaneously, and side by side.
In Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning out of a given quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of the process of production itself.
Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield therefore, in equal times unequal quantities of fractional products.
Here we have again the principle of co-operation in its simplest form, the simultaneous employment of many doing the same thing; only now, this principle is the expression of an organic relation.
It develops, along with the qualitative sub-division of the social labour-process, a quantitative rule and proportionality for that process.
The isolation of such functions, their allotment to a particular labourer, does not become advantageous till after an increase in the number of labourers employed; but this increase must affect every group proportionally.
The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular detail function is assigned, is made up of homogeneous elements, and is one of the constituent parts of the total mechanism.
In many manufactures, however, the group itself is an organised body of labour, the total mechanism being a repetition or multiplication of these elementary organisms.
Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass bottles.
It may be resolved into three essentially different stages.
First, the preliminary stage, consisting of the preparation of the components of the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &c.
Various detail labourers are employed in this first stage, as also in the final one of removing the bottles from the drying furnace, sorting and packing them, &c.
In the middle, between these two stages, comes the glass melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid mass.
At each mouth of the furnace, there works a group, called “the hole,” consisting of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower, one gatherer, one putter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in.
These five detail workers are so many special organs of a single working organism that acts only as a whole, and therefore can operate only by the direct co-operation of the whole five.
The whole body is paralysed if but one of its members be wanting.
Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combination of various handicrafts, so, too, it develops into a combination of various manufactures.
The larger English glass manufacturers, for instance, make their own earthenware melting-pots, because, on the quality of these depends, to a great extent, the success or failure of the process.
The manufacture of one of the means of production is here united with that of the product.
On the other hand, the manufacture of the product may be united with other manufactures, of which that product is the raw material, or with the products of which it is itself subsequently mixed.
Thus, we find the manufacture of flint glass combined with that of glass cutting and brass founding; the latter for the metal settings of various articles of glass.
The various manufactures so combined form more or less separate departments of a larger manufacture, but are at the same time independent processes, each with its own division of labour.
In spite of the many advantages offered by this combination of manufactures, it never grows into a complete technical system on its own foundation.
That happens only on its transformation into an industry carried on by machinery.
Thus, at an early period in paper manufacture, the tearing up of the rags was done by paper-mills; and in metal works, the pounding of the ores was effected by stamping mills.
The Roman Empire had handed down the elementary form of all machinery in the water-wheel.
The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions of the compass, of gunpowder, of type-printing, and of the automatic clock.
But, on the whole, machinery played that subordinate part which Adam Smith assigns to it in comparison with division of labour.
The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a number of detail labourers, is the machinery specially characteristic of the manufacturing period.
The various operations that are performed in turns by the producer of a commodity, and coalesce one with another during the progress of production, lay claim to him in various ways.
In one operation he must exert more strength, in another more skill, in another more attention; and the same individual does not possess all these qualities in an equal degree.
After Manufacture has once separated, made independent, and isolated the various operations, the labourers are divided, classified, and grouped according to their predominating qualities.
The one-sidedness and the deficiencies of the detail labourer become perfections when he is a part of the collective labourer.
The habit of doing only one thing converts him into a never failing instrument, while his connexion with the whole mechanism compels him to work with the regularity of the parts of a machine.
Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and complex, both high and low, his members, the individual labour-powers, require different degrees of training, and must therefore have different values.
Manufacture, therefore, develops a hierarchy of labour-powers, to which there corresponds a scale of wages.
Every process of production, however, requires certain simple manipulations, which every man is capable of doing.
They too are now severed from their connexion with the more pregnant moments of activity, and ossified into exclusive functions of specially appointed labourers.
Hence, Manufacture begets, in every handicraft that it seizes upon, a class of so-called unskilled labourers, a class which handicraft industry strictly excluded.
If it develops a one-sided speciality into a perfection, at the expense of the whole of a man’s working capacity, it also begins to make a speciality of the absence of all development.
Alongside of the hierarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of the labourers into skilled and unskilled.
For the latter, the cost of apprenticeship vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of artificers, in consequence of the functions being simplified.
In both cases the value of labour-power falls.
An exception to this law holds good whenever the decomposition of the labour-process begets new and comprehensive functions, that either had no place at all, or only a very modest one, in handicrafts.
We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its simple elements, then the detail labourer and his implements, and finally, the totality of the mechanism.
We shall now lightly touch upon the relation between the division of labour in manufacture, and the social division of labour, which forms the foundation of all production of commodities.
If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the separation of social production into its main divisions or genera — viz.
Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying down of individuals to a particular calling, develops itself, just as does the division of labour in manufacture, from opposite starting-points.
Different communities find different means of production, and different means of subsistence in their natural environment.
Hence, their modes of production, and of living, and their products are different.
It is this spontaneously developed difference which, when different communities come in contact, calls forth the mutual exchange of products, and the consequent gradual conversion of those products into commodities.
In the latter case, the social division of labour arises from the exchange between spheres of production, that are originally distinct and independent of one another.
In the one case, it is the making dependent what was before independent; in the other case, the making independent what was before dependent.
The foundation of every division of labour that is well developed, and brought about by the exchange of commodities, is the separation between town and country.
It may be said, that the whole economic history of society is summed up in the movement of this antithesis.
We pass it over, however, for the present.
Nevertheless, this density is more or less relative.
Inversely, the former division reacts upon and develops and multiplies the latter.
Simultaneously, with the differentiation of the instruments of labour, the industries that produce these instruments, become more and more differentiated.
If it seize upon a particular stage in the production of a commodity, the other stages of its production become converted into so many independent industries.
It has already been stated, that where the finished article consists merely of a number of parts fitted together, the detail operations may re-establish themselves as genuine and separate handicrafts.
Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: “We make a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens.
The analogy appears most indisputable where there is an invisible bond uniting the various branches of trade.
For instance the cattle-breeder produces hides, the tanner makes the hides into leather, and the shoemaker, the leather into boots.
Here the thing produced by each of them is but a step towards the final form, which is the product of all their labours combined.
There are, besides, all the various industries that supply the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker with the means of production.
But what is it that forms the bond between the independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker?
It is the fact that their respective products are commodities.
What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour in manufactures?
The fact that the detail labourer produces no commodities.
It is only the common product of all the detail labourers that becomes a commodity.
The division of labour in the workshop implies concentration of the means of production in the hands of one capitalist; the division of labour in society implies their dispersion among many independent producers of commodities.
But this constant tendency to equilibrium, of the various spheres of production, is exercised, only in the shape of a reaction against the constant upsetting of this equilibrium.
Division of labour within the workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capitalist over men, that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs to him.
Occupying areas of from 100 up to several thousand acres, each forms a compact whole producing all it requires.
The chief part of the products is destined for direct use by the community itself, and does not take the form of a commodity.
Hence, production here is independent of that division of labour brought about, in Indian society as a whole, by means of the exchange of commodities.
The constitution of these communities varies in different parts of India.
In those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in common, and the produce divided among the members.
At the same time, spinning and weaving are carried on in each family as subsidiary industries.
This dozen of individuals is maintained at the expense of the whole community.
If the population increases, a new community is founded, on the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied land.
The whole mechanism discloses a systematic division of labour; but a division like that in manufactures is impossible, since the smith and the carpenter, &c.
The structure of the economic elements of society remains untouched by the storm-clouds of the political sky.
The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting most strictly the number of apprentices and journeymen that a single master could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist.
Moreover, he could not employ his journeymen in many other handicrafts than the one in which he was a master.
The guilds zealously repelled every encroachment by the capital of merchants, the only form of free capital with which they came in contact.
A merchant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a commodity he could not buy.
He existed only on sufferance, as a dealer in the products of the handicrafts.
Hence, the guild organisation, however much it may have contributed by separating, isolating, and perfecting the handicrafts, to create the material conditions for the existence of manufacture, excluded division of labour in the workshop.
An increased number of labourers under the control of one capitalist is the natural starting-point, as well of co-operation generally, as of manufacture in particular.
But the division of labour in manufacture makes this increase in the number of workmen a technical necessity.
The minimum number that any given capitalist is bound to employ is here prescribed by the previously established division of labour.
On the other hand, the advantages of further division are obtainable only by adding to the number of workmen, and this can be done only by adding multiples of the various detail groups.
But an increase in the variable component of the capital employed necessitates an increase in its constant component, too, in the workshops, implements, &c.
The quantity of it consumed in a given time, by a given amount of labour, increases in the same ratio as does the productive power of that labour in consequence of its division.
In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collective working organism is a form of existence of capital.
The mechanism that is made up of numerous individual detail labourers belongs to the capitalist.
Hence, the productive power resulting from a combination of labours appears to be the productive power of capital.
Manufacture proper not only subjects the previously independent workman to the discipline and command of capital, but, in addition, creates a hierarchic gradation of the workmen themselves.
While simple co-operation leaves the mode of working by the individual for the most part unchanged, manufacture thoroughly revolutionises it, and seizes labour-power by its very roots.
If, at first, the workman sells his labour-power to capital, because the material means of producing a commodity fail him, now his very labour-power refuses its services unless it has been sold to capital.
Its functions can be exercised only in an environment that exists in the workshop of the capitalist after the sale.
By nature unfitted to make anything independently, the manufacturing labourer develops productive activity as a mere appendage of the capitalist’s workshop.
As the chosen people bore in their features the sign manual of Jehovah, so division of labour brands the manufacturing workman as the property of capital.
Intelligence in production expands in one direction, because it vanishes in many others.
What is lost by the detail labourers, is concentrated in the capital that employs them.
This separation begins in simple co-operation, where the capitalist represents to the single workman, the oneness and the will of the associated labour.
It is developed in manufacture which cuts down the labourer into a detail labourer.
It is completed in modern industry, which makes science a productive force distinct from labour and presses it into the service of capital.
In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, and through him capital, rich in social productive power, each labourer must be made poor in individual productive powers.
“Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition.
Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand or the foot is independent of either.
As a matter of fact, some few manufacturers in the middle of the 18th century preferred, for certain operations that were trade secrets, to employ half-idiotic persons.
“The understandings of the greater part of men,” says Adam Smith, “are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments.
He generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become.
It corrupts even the activity of his body and renders him incapable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in any other employments than that to which he has been bred.
His dexterity at his own particular trade seems in this manner to be acquired at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial virtues.
But in every improved and civilised society, this is the state into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily fall.
For preventing the complete deterioration of the great mass of the people by division of labour, A.
Smith recommends education of the people by the State, but prudently, and in homeopathic doses.
Garnier, his French translator and commentator, who, under the first French Empire, quite naturally developed into a senator, quite as naturally opposes him on this point.
Ought it to expend a part of the public money in the attempt to confound and blend together two classes of labour, which are striving after division and separation?
Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from division of labour in society as a whole.
The subdivision of labour is the assassination of a people.
Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, manufacture, commences as a spontaneous formation.
So soon as it attains some consistence and extension, it becomes the recognised methodical and systematic form of capitalist production.
Any alteration in this form, except in trivial matters, is solely owing to a revolution in the instruments of labour.
In such cases, a week’s experience is enough to determine the proportion between the numbers of the hands necessary for the various functions.
It increases the social productive power of labour, not only for the benefit of the capitalist instead of for that of the labourer, but it does this by crippling the individual labourers.
It creates new conditions for the lordship of capital over labour.
In most striking contrast with this accentuation of quantity and exchange-value, is the attitude of the writers of classical antiquity, who hold exclusively by quality and use-value.
Hence both product and producer are improved by division of labour.
If the growth of the quantity produced is occasionally mentioned, this is only done with reference to the greater abundance of use-values.
There is not a word alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of commodities.
Hence throughout the whole manufacturing period there runs the complaint of want of discipline among the workmen.
“Order must in one way or another be established,” exclaims in 1770 the oft-cited author of the “Essay on Trade and Commerce.
Andrew Ure 66 years later, “Order” was wanting in manufacture based on “the scholastic dogma of division of labour,” and “Arkwright created order.
At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize upon the production of society to its full extent, or to revolutionise that production to its very core.
It towered up as an economic work of art, on the broad foundation of the town handicrafts, and of the rural domestic industries.
At a given stage in its development, the narrow technical basis on which manufacture rested, came into conflict with requirements of production that were created by manufacture itself.
One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the production of the instruments of labour themselves, including especially the complicated mechanical apparatus then already employed.
A machine-factory, says Ure, “displayed the division of labour in manifold gradations – the file, the drill, the lathe, having each its different workman in the order of skill.
This workshop, the product of the division of labour in manufacture, produced in its turn – machines.
It is they that sweep away the handicraftsman’s work as the regulating principle of social production.
Thus, on the one hand, the technical reason for the life-long annexation of the workman to a detail function is removed.
On the other hand, the fetters that this same principle laid on the dominion of capital, fall away.
“It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day’s toil of any human being.
That is, however, by no means the aim of the capitalistic application of machinery.
In short, it is a means for producing surplus-value.
In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production begins with the labour-power, in modern industry it begins with the instruments of labour.
Our first inquiry then is, how the instruments of labour are converted from tools into machines, or what is the difference between a machine and the implements of a handicraft?
We are only concerned here with striking and general characteristics; for epochs in the history of society are no more separated from each other by hard and fast lines of demarcation, than are geological epochs.
Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are followed by a few English economists, call a tool a simple machine, and a machine a complex tool.
They see no essential difference between them, and even give the name of machine to the simple mechanical powers, the lever, the inclined plane, the screw, the wedge, &c.
As a matter of fact, every machine is a combination of those simple powers, no matter how they may be disguised.
From the economic standpoint this explanation is worth nothing, because the historical element is wanting.
Nay, this very loom, though a tool when worked by hand, would, if worked by steam, be a machine.
And since the application of animal power is one of man’s earliest inventions, production by machinery would have preceded production by handicrafts.
He described it as a machine “to spin without fingers.
All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism, and finally the tool or working machine.
The motor mechanism is that which puts the whole in motion.
It either generates its own motive power, like the steam-engine, the caloric engine, the electromagnetic machine, &c.
These two first parts of the whole mechanism are there, solely for putting the working machines in motion, by means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon and modified as desired.
The tool or working machine is that part of the machinery with which the industrial revolution of the 18th century started.
And to this day it constantly serves as such a starting-point, whenever a handicraft, or a manufacture, is turned into an industry carried on by machinery.
The machine proper is therefore a mechanism that, after being set in motion, performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly done by the workman with similar tools.
Whether the motive power is derived from man, or from some other machine, makes no difference in this respect.
From the moment that the tool proper is taken from man, and fitted into a mechanism, a machine takes the place of a mere implement.
The difference strikes one at once, even in those cases where man himself continues to be the prime mover.
The number of implements that he himself can use simultaneously, is limited by the number of his own natural instruments of production, by the number of his bodily organs.
In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner work two spinning-wheels, that is, to work simultaneously with both hands and both feet.
Later, a treddle spinning-wheel with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning, who could spin two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two-headed men.
The number of tools that a machine can bring into play simultaneously, is from the very first emancipated from the organic limits that hedge in the tools of a handicraftsman.
In many manual implements the distinction between man as mere motive power, and man as the workman or operator properly so called, is brought into striking contrast.
For instance, the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while the hand, working with the spindle, and drawing and twisting, performs the real operation of spinning.
Here and there, long before the period of manufacture, and also, to some extent, during that period, these implements pass over into machines, but without creating any revolution in the mode of production.
It becomes evident, in the period of modern industry, that these implements, even under their form of manual tools, are already machines.
The common and very imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is, in England, occasionally converted into a blowing-engine, by connecting its arm with a steam-engine.
It was, on the contrary, the invention of machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines necessary.
Of course, this does not prevent such a change of form from producing great technical alterations in the mechanism that was originally constructed to be driven by man alone.
Now-a-days, all machines that have their way to make, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines, &c.
Here we have the machine, but only as an elementary factor of production by machinery.
But assuming that he is acting simply as a motor, that a machine has taken the place of his tool, it is evident that he can be replaced by natural forces.
Nevertheless the horse was extensively used during the infancy of modern industry.
This is proved, as well by the complaints of contemporary agriculturists, as by the term “horse-power,” which has survived to this day as an expression for mechanical force.
Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in England, the birthplace of modern industry, the use of water power preponderated even during the manufacturing period.
In the 17th century attempts had already been made to turn two pairs of millstones with a single water-wheel.
In this way, during the manufacturing period, were developed the first scientific and technical elements of Modern Mechanical Industry.
Arkwright’s throstle spinning mill was from the very first turned by water.
But for all that, the use of water, as the predominant motive power, was beset with difficulties.
It could not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, and, above all, it was essentially local.
The greatness of Watt’s genius showed itself in the specification of the patent that he took out in April, 1784.
In that specification his steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose, but as an agent universally applicable in Mechanical Industry.
In it he points out applications, many of which, as for instance, the steam-hammer, were not introduced till half a century later.
Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines in navigation.
His successors, Boulton and Watt, sent to the exhibition of 1851 steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers.
Thereupon the individual machine, that we have hitherto been considering, sinks into a mere factor in production by machinery.
One motive mechanism was now able to drive many machines at once.
The motive mechanism grows with the number of the machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting mechanism becomes a wide-spreading apparatus.
We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a number of machines of one kind from a complex system of machinery.
In the London exhibition of 1862, there was an American machine for making paper cornets.
It cut the paper, pasted, folded, and finished 300 in a minute.
Here, the whole process, which, when carried on as Manufacture, was split up into, and carried out by, a series of operations, is completed by a single machine, working a combination of various tools.
Now, whether such a machine be merely a reproduction of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of various simple implements specialised by Manufacture, in either case, in the factory, i.
Thus, a weaving factory is constituted of a number of power-looms, working side by side, and a sewing factory of a number of sewing-machines all in the same building.
Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of a machine, so a number of machines of one kind constitute the organs of the motive mechanism.
Here we have again the co-operation by division of labour that characterises Manufacture; only now, it is a combination of detail machines.
The special tools of the various detail workmen, such as those of the beaters, cambers, spinners, &c.
In those branches of industry in which the machinery system is first introduced, Manufacture itself furnishes, in a general way, the natural basis for the division, and consequent organisation, of the process of production.
Nevertheless an essential difference at once manifests itself.
In Manufacture it is the workmen who, with their manual implements, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each particular detail process.
If, on the one hand, the workman becomes adapted to the process, on the other, the process was previously made suitable to the workman.
This subjective principle of the division of labour no longer exists in production by machinery.
But, of course, in this case also, theory must be perfected by accumulated experience on a large scale.
In Manufacture the isolation of each detail process is a condition imposed by the nature of division of labour, but in the fully developed factory the continuity of those processes is, on the contrary, imperative.
As an example, both of continuity of production, and of the carrying out of the automatic principle, we may take a modern paper mill.
Besides these, there still exist, in India and China, two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the same industry.
An organised system of machines, to which motion is communicated by the transmitting mechanism from a central automaton, is the most developed form of production by machinery.
There were mules and steam-engines before there were any labourers, whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules and steam-engines; just as men wore clothes before there were such people as tailors.
The inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, Watt, and others, were, however, practicable, only because those inventors found, ready to hand, a considerable number of skilled mechanical workmen, placed at their disposal by the manufacturing period.
Some of these workmen were independent handicraftsman of various trades, others were grouped together in manufactures, in which, as before-mentioned, division of labour was strictly carried out.
Here, then, we see in Manufacture the immediate technical foundation of modern industry.
Manufacture produced the machinery, by means of which modern industry abolished the handicraft and manufacturing systems in those spheres of production that it first seized upon.
The factory system was therefore raised, in the natural course of things, on an inadequate foundation.
But besides this, at a certain stage of its development, modern industry became technologically incompatible with the basis furnished for it by handicraft and Manufacture.
Such machines as the modern hydraulic press, the modern power-loom, and the modern carding engine, could never have been furnished by Manufacture.
A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of industry involves a similar change in other spheres.
Thus spinning by machinery made weaving by machinery a necessity, and both together made the mechanical and chemical revolution that took place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing, imperative.
But more especially, the revolution in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process of production, i.
Modern industry had therefore itself to take in hand the machine, its characteristic instrument of production, and to construct machines by machines.
It was not till it did this, that it built up for itself a fitting technical foundation, and stood on its own feet.
Machinery, simultaneously with the increasing use of it, in the first decades of this century, appropriated, by degrees, the fabrication of machines proper.
But it was only during the decade preceding 1866, that the construction of railways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale called into existence the cyclopean machines now employed in the construction of prime movers.
The most essential condition to the production of machines by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount of force, and yet under perfect control.
Such a condition was already supplied by the steam-engine.
But at the same time it was necessary to produce the geometrically accurate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones, and spheres, required in the detail parts of the machines.
This mechanical appliance replaces, not some particular tool, but the hand itself, which produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting tool along the iron or other material operated upon.
“with a degree of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give.
If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery employed in the construction of machines, which constitutes the operating tool, we find the manual implements re-appearing, but on a cyclopean scale.
The operating part of the boring machine is an immense drill driven by a steam-engine; without this machine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made.
The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessitate the substitution of natural forces for human force, and the conscious application of science, instead of rule of thumb.
In simple co-operation, and even in that founded on division of labour, the suppression of the isolated, by the collective, workman still appears to be more or less accidental.
Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, operates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common.
Hence the co-operative character of the labour-process is, in the latter case, a technical necessity dictated by the instrument of labour itself.
We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-operation and division of labour cost capital nothing.
So also physical forces, like steam, water, &c.
But just as a man requires lungs to breathe with, so he requires something that is work of man’s hand, in order to consume physical forces productively.
A water-wheel is necessary to exploit the force of water, and a steam-engine to exploit the elasticity of steam.
But the exploitation of these laws for the purposes of telegraphy, &c.
The tool, as we have seen, is not exterminated by the machine.
From being a dwarf implement of the human organism, it expands and multiplies into the implement of a mechanism created by man.
Capital now sets the labourer to work, not with a manual tool, but with a machine which itself handles the tools.
Machinery, like every other component of constant capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own value to the product that it serves to beget.
In so far as the machine has value, and, in consequence, parts with value to the product, it forms an element in the value of that product.
Instead of being cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to the value of the machine.
And it is clear as noon-day, that machines and systems of machinery, the characteristic instruments of labour of Modern Industry, are incomparably more loaded with value than the implements used in handicrafts and manufactures.
In the first place, it must be observed that the machinery, while always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters into the value-begetting process only by bits.
It never adds more value than it loses, on an average, by wear and tear.
Hence there is a great difference between the value of a machine, and the value transferred in a given time by that machine to the product.
The longer the life of the machine in the labour-process, the greater is that difference.
The greater the productive power of the machinery compared with that of the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous service compared with that of the tool.
In modern industry man succeeded for the first time in making the product of his past labour work on a large scale gratuitously, like the forces of Nature.
The same is the case with the steam-hammer mentioned above.
Since its daily wear and tear, its coal-consumption, &c.
Many of these colossal hammers strike seventy times in a minute, and Ryder’s patent machine for forging spindles with small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute.
Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the total value of the machinery.
The less labour it contains, the less value it imparts to the product.
The less value it gives up, so much the more productive it is, and so much the more its services approximate to those of natural forces.
But the production of machinery by machinery lessens its value relatively to its extension and efficacy.
In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount, relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of yarn, for instance, increases.
The productiveness of a machine is therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces.
Hence, leaving waste on one side, 366 lbs.
Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an average day’s labour.
By means of his invention one negress was enabled to clean 100 lbs.
In India they employ for separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half machine, half tool, called a churka; with this one man and a woman can clean 28 lbs.
With the churka invented some years ago by Dr.
Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lbs.
If oxen, steam, or water, be used for driving it, only a few boys and girls as feeders are required.
Sixteen of these machines driven by oxen do as much work in a day as formerly 750 people did on an average.
I return to this example in order to clear up an erroneous notion.
Therefore, though a machine cost as much as the labour-power displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised in it is even then much less than the living labour it replaces.
For the capitalist, however, this use is still more limited.
But it is the former difference alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of producing a commodity, and, through the pressure of competition, influences his action.
In some branches of the woollen manufacture in England the employment of children has during recent years been considerably diminished, and in some cases has been entirely abolished.
Because the Factory Acts made two sets of children necessary, one working six hours, the other four, or each working five hours.
But the parents refused to sell the “half-timers” cheaper than the “full-timers.
Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful squandering of human labour-power for the most despicable purposes than in England, the land of machinery.
The starting-point of modern industry is, as we have shown, the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution attains its most highly developed form in the organised system of machinery in a factory.
Before we inquire how human material is incorporated with this objective organism, let us consider some general effects of this revolution on the labourer himself.
In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it becomes a means of employing labourers of slight muscular strength, and those whose bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the more supple.
The labour of women and children was, therefore, the first thing sought for by capitalists who used machinery.
Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped the place, not only of the children’s play, but also of free labour at home within moderate limits for the support of the family.
The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult labourer, but also by that necessary to maintain his family.
Machinery, by throwing every member of that family on to the labour-market, spreads the value of the man’s labour-power over his whole family.
In order that the family may live, four people must now, not only labour, but expend surplus-labour for the capitalist.
Thus we see, that machinery, while augmenting the human material that forms the principal object of capital’s exploiting power, at the same time raises the degree of exploitation.
Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract between the labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their mutual relations.
But now the capitalist buys children and young persons under age.
Previously, the workman sold his own labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent.
The demand for children’s labour often resembles in form the inquiries for negro slaves, such as were formerly to be read among the advertisements in American journals.
A surgeon officially appointed must certify their age.
The manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look as if they were already 13 years old.
In the notorious district of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every Monday and Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes from 9 years of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufacturers.
The scene and language while this market is going on are quite disgraceful.
Whenever the law limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries not before interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are always renewed.
They allege that numbers of the parents withdraw their children from the industry brought under the Act, in order to sell them where “freedom of labour” still rules, i.
In this place, therefore, we dwell only on one point, the enormous mortality, during the first few years of their life, of the children of the operatives.
In those agricultural districts, “where a minimum in the employment of women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low.
Julian Hunter was therefore commissioned to investigate this phenomenon on the spot.
His report is incorporated with the “Sixth Report on Public Health.
Hunter examined in that district, were “wonderfully in accord” on this point.
In fact, the revolution in the mode of cultivation had led to the introduction of the industrial system.
Every phenomenon of the factory districts is here reproduced, including, but to a greater extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and dosing children with opiates.
Simon, the medical officer of the Privy Council and editor in chief of the Reports on Public Health, “may excuse the profound misgiving with which I regard any large industrial employment of adult women.
The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploitation of women and children has been so exhaustively depicted by F.
Engels in his “Lage der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands,” and other writers, that I need only mention the subject in this place.
Sir John Kincaid, factory inspector for Scotland, relates experiences of the same kind.
“The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs.
Upon asking her to spell her name, she straightway made a mistake, by beginning with the letter C, but correcting herself immediately, she said her name began with a K.
On looking at her signature, however, in the school certificate books, I noticed that she spelt it in various ways, while her handwriting left no doubt as to her unfitness to teach.
To this is to be added scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and other materials for teaching, and the depressing effect upon the poor children themselves of a close, noisome atmosphere.
In Scotland the manufacturers try all they can to do without the children that are obliged to attend school.
Horribly grotesque does this appear in print works, which are regulated by a special Act.
The attendance at school must be between 8 a.
In other print works the children’s attendance at school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies of the work in the establishment.
If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the productiveness of labour — i.
In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements of labour become automatic, things moving and working independent of the workman.
They are thenceforth an industrial perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it not meet with certain natural obstructions in the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human attendants.
This resistance is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, and by the more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed on it.
The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely proportional to the value transferred by it to the product.
The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional to its working-time.
The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds.
The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from non-use, as a sword rusts when left in its scabbard.
The latter kind is due to the elements.
The former is more or less directly proportional, the latter to a certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine.
But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation.
It loses exchange-value, either by machines of the same sort being produced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competition with it.
It has, therefore, lost value more or less.
The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger of moral depreciation; and the longer the working-day, the shorter is that period.
It is, therefore, in the early days of the life of machinery that this special incentive to the prolongation of the working-day makes itself felt most acutely.
The lengthening of the working-day, on the other hand, allows of production on an extended scale without any alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and buildings.
Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus-value, but the outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes.
Ashworth, a cotton magnate, to Professor Nassau W.
Senior, “lays down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital worth eighteen-pence.
It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single one of our people should ever leave the factory!
The increased use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received from Ashworth clearly perceives, makes a constantly increasing lengthening of the working-day “desirable.
The magnitude of the profit whets his appetite for more profit.
Surplus-value arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount of surplus-value depends on two factors, viz.
Given the length of the working-day, the rate of surplus-value is determined by the relative duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus-labour in a day.
The number of the labourers simultaneously employed depends, on its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital.
It converts what was formerly variable capital, invested in labour-power, into machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce surplus-value.
Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of modern industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and natural restriction on the length of the working-day.
They understood, as the learned Bastiat, and before him the still wiser MacCulloch have discovered, nothing of Political Economy and Christianity.
They did not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of lengthening the working-day.
They perhaps excused the slavery of one on the ground that it was a means to the full development of another.
But to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few crude and half-educated parvenus, might become “eminent spinners,” “extensive sausage-makers,” and “influential shoe-black dealers,” to do this, they lacked the bump of Christianity.
Thenceforth a phenomenon that we have already met with, namely, the intensification of labour, develops into great importance.
Our analysis of absolute surplus-value had reference primarily to the extension or duration of the labour, its intensity being assumed as given.
We now proceed to consider the substitution of a more intensified labour for labour of more extensive duration, and the degree of the former.
Thus in England, during half a century, lengthening of the working-day went hand in hand with increasing intensity of factory labour.
At the same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus-value.
Generally speaking, the mode of producing relative surplus-value consists in raising the productive power of the workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a given time with the same expenditure of labour.
Labour-time continues to transmit as before the same value to the total product, but this unchanged amount of exchange-value is spread over more use-value; hence the value of each single commodity sinks.
Otherwise, however, so soon as the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place.
This condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period thenceforward counts for what it really is, a greater quantity of labour.
In addition to a measure of its extension, i.
The denser hour of the ten hours’ working-day contains more labour, i.
We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified?
The first effect of shortening the working-day results from the self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in an inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure.
Hence, within certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is gained by the increasing tension of labour-power.
That the workman moreover really does expend more labour-power, is ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays him.
It seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect was produced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had already created the strictest discipline.
But in the weaving department, where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the conditions of the work.
While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, and other such items, for one hour.
Similar experiments, and with the like success, were carried out in the mills of Messrs.
The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by enabling the workman to exert more strength in a given time.
So soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery becomes in the hands of capital the objective means, systematically employed for squeezing out more labour in a given time.
This is effected in two ways: by increasing the speed of the machinery, and by giving the workman more machinery to tent.
The improvements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so strikingly distinguishes modern from the older machinery, have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a constantly decreasing minimum.
“The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations.
In 1815, the labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No.
In the carding-room there has also been a great increase of labour.
One person there does the work formerly divided between two.
The apparent correctness of their reasons will be best shown by the following contemporary statement by Leonard Horner, the factory inspector, their ever watchful censor.
It frequently happens that he finds he has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slacken his pace.
I therefore concluded, that as an active and intelligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve.
I further assumed that the operative paid by piecework, would exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of continuing at the same rate.
Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction of the working hours below twelve would necessarily diminish production.
We now come to the period that follows the introduction of the Ten Hours’ Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk, and flax mills.
“I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent.
“The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised their productive power very much.
One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploitation of labour-power.
The increase in the spindles was therefore 26.
On the other hand, after 1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases doubled.
Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no uncommon thing for one person to tent four.
Twelve hours’ work, as is evident from the facts adduced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours.
It is therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has increased during the last 10 years.
Greenhow has pointed out in his recent report on this subject.
At the commencement of this chapter we considered that which we may call the body of the factory, i.
We now turn to the factory as a whole, and that in its most perfect form.
These two descriptions are far from being identical.
The first description is applicable to every possible employment of machinery on a large scale, the second is characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the modern factory system.
Ure prefers therefore, to describe the central machine, from which the motion comes, not only as an automaton, but as an autocrat.
“In these spacious halls the benignant power of steam summons around him his myriads of willing menials.
Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it passes over to the machine.
The capabilities of the tool are emancipated from the restraints that are inseparable from human labour-power.
Thereby the technical foundation on which is based the division of labour in Manufacture, is swept away.
The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced by the connexion between the head workman and his few assistants.
The essential division is, into workmen who are actually employed on the machines (among whom are included a few who look after the engine), and into mere attendants (almost exclusively children) of these workmen.
Among the attendants are reckoned more or less all “Feeders” who supply the machines with the material to be worked.
This is a superior class of workmen, some of them scientifically educated, others brought up to a trade; it is distinct from the factory operative class, and merely aggregated to it.
To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own movements to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton.
But the employment of machinery does away with the necessity of crystallising this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, by the constant annexation of a particular man to a particular function.
Since the motion of the whole system does not proceed from the workman, but from the machinery, a change of persons can take place at any time without an interruption of the work.
Lastly, the quickness with which machine work is learnt by young people, does away with the necessity of bringing up for exclusive employment by machinery, a special class of operatives.
The life-long speciality of handling one and the same tool, now becomes the life-long speciality of serving one and the same machine.
Machinery is put to a wrong use, with the object of transforming the workman, from his very childhood, into a part of a detail-machine.
In this way, not only are the expenses of his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete.
Here as everywhere else, we must distinguish between the increased productiveness due to the development of the social process of production, and that due to the capitalist exploitation of that process.
In handicrafts and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the factory, the machine makes use of him.
There the movements of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the movements of the machine that he must follow.
In manufacture the workmen are parts of a living mechanism.
In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of the workman, who becomes its mere living appendage.
“The miserable routine of endless drudgery and toil in which the same mechanical process is gone through over and over again, is like the labour of Sisyphus.
The burden of labour, like the rock, keeps ever falling back on the worn-out labourer.
The lightening of the labour, even, becomes a sort of torture, since the machine does not free the labourer from work, but deprives the work of all interest.
But it is only in the factory system that this inversion for the first time acquires technical and palpable reality.
By means of its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour confronts the labourer, during the labour-process, in the shape of capital, of dead labour, that dominates, and pumps dry, living labour-power.
To devise and administer a successful code of factory discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright!
Even at the present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory hands.
The place of the slave-driver’s lash is taken by the overlooker’s book of penalties.
We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under which factory labour is carried on.
Is Fourier wrong when he calls factories “tempered bagnos"?
The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer dates back to the very origin of capital.
It raged on throughout the whole manufacturing period.
But only since the introduction of machinery has the workman fought against the instrument of labour itself, the material embodiment of capital.
He revolts against this particular form of the means of production, as being the material basis of the capitalist mode of production.
In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts of the workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving ribbons and trimmings, called in Germany Bandmühle, Schnurmühle, and Mühlenstuhl.
But the Mayor being apprehensive that this invention might throw a large number of workmen on the streets, caused the inventor to be secretly strangled or drowned.
In Leyden, this machine was not used till 1629; there the riots of the ribbon-weavers at length compelled the Town Council to prohibit it.
Hinc turbae ortae et querulae textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti a magistratu prohibitus est.
As a result there arose disturbances and complaints from the weavers, until the Town Council finally prohibited the use of this instrument.
It was also prohibited in Cologne in 1676, at the same time that its introduction into England was causing disturbances among the workpeople.
In Hamburg it was burnt in public by order of the Senate.
This machine, which shook Europe to its foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule and the power-loom, and of the industrial revolution of the 18th century.
About 1630, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a Dutchman, succumbed to the excesses of the populace.
Even as late as the beginning of the 18th century, sawmills driven by water overcame the opposition of the people, supported as it was by Parliament, only with great difficulty.
Fifty thousand workpeople, who had previously lived by carding wool, petitioned Parliament against Arkwright’s scribbling mills and carding engines.
The contests about wages in Manufacture, pre-suppose manufacture, and are in no sense directed against its existence.
The opposition against the establishment of new manufactures, proceeds from the guilds and privileged towns, not from the workpeople.
Hence the writers of the manufacturing period treat the division of labour chiefly as a means of virtually supplying a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of actually displacing those in work.
It means only this, that many millions of workpeople would be required to replace the spinning machinery.
During the manufacturing period, handicraft labour, altered though it was by division of labour, was yet the basis.
At that time, therefore, division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, were viewed more from the positive aspect, that they made the workpeople more productive.
The labourers are first driven from the land, and then come the sheep.
Land grabbing on a great scale, such as was perpetrated in England, is the first step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture on a great scale.
Hence this subversion of agriculture puts on, at first, more the appearance of a political revolution.
The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a machine, immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself.
The self-expansion of capital by means of machinery is thenceforward directly proportional to the number of the workpeople, whose means of livelihood have been destroyed by that machinery.
The whole system of capitalist production is based on the fact that the workman sells his labour-power as a commodity.
Division of labour specialises this labour-power, by reducing it to skill in handling a particular tool.
That portion of the working-class, thus by machinery rendered superfluous, i.
When machinery seizes on an industry by degrees, it produces chronic misery among the operatives who compete with it.
Where the transition is rapid, the effect is acute and felt by great masses.
History discloses no tragedy more horrible than the gradual extinction of the English hand-loom weavers, an extinction that was spread over several decades, and finally sealed in 1838.
Many of them died of starvation, many with families vegetated for a long time on 2½ d.
On the other hand, the English cotton machinery produced an acute effect in India.
“The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce.
The bones of the cotton-weavers are bleaching the plains of India.
No doubt, in turning them out of this “temporal” world, the machinery caused them no more than “a temporary inconvenience.
Therefore, it is with the advent of machinery, that the workman for the first time brutally revolts against the instruments of labour.
The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer.
This direct antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, whenever newly introduced machinery competes with handicrafts or manufactures, handed down from former times.
But even in modern industry the continual improvement of machinery, and the development of the automatic system, has an analogous effect.
A couple of examples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will suffice on this point.
Our estimated saving in waste is about 10% in the quantity of cotton consumed.
Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of labour of 10%.
The following table shows the total result of the mechanical improvements in the English cotton industry due to the American Civil War.
The “temporary” misery inflicted on the workpeople by the cotton-crisis, was heightened, and from being temporary made permanent, by the rapid and persistent progress of machinery.
But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better of the workman, and is constantly on the point of making him superfluous.
It is also a power inimical to him, and as such capital proclaims it from the roof tops and as such makes use of it.
It is the most powerful weapon for repressing strikes, those periodical revolts of the working-class against the autocracy of capital.
It would be possible to write quite a history of the inventions, made since 1830, for the sole purpose of supplying capital with weapons against the revolts of the working-class.
At the head of these in importance, stands the self-acting mule, because it opened up a new epoch in the automatic system.
“The characteristic feature of our modern mechanical improvements, is the introduction of self-acting tool machinery.
What every mechanical workman has now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work himself but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine.
The whole class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, is now done away with.
Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic.
The result was a considerable increase in my profits.
This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that when capital enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility.
“it (physico-mechanical science) has been accused of lending itself to the rich capitalist as an instrument for harassing the poor.
After preaching a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid development of machinery is to the working-classes, he warns them, that by their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development.
“Violent revulsions of this nature,” he says, “display short-sighted man in the contemptible character of a self-tormentor.
A few pages before he states the contrary.
“Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions resulting from erroneous views among the factory operatives, the factory system would have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all concerned.
It certainly augments the demand for the labour of children and increases the rate of their wages.
On the other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the lowness of the children’s wages on the ground that it prevents parents from sending their children at too early an age into the factory.
This does not prevent him from calling upon the factory operatives to thank Providence, who by means of machinery has given them the leisure to think of their “immortal interests.
To simplify matters, we take no account of buildings, coal, &c.
Is any capital set free by this metamorphosis?
The variable capital, instead of being one half, is only one quarter, of the total capital.
Instead of being set free, a part of the capital is here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged against labour-power: variable has been changed into constant capital.
With each improvement in the machinery, it will employ fewer.
But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new machinery affords employment to a greater number of mechanics, can that be called compensation to the carpet-makers, thrown on the streets?
At the best, its construction employs fewer men than its employment displaces.
Hence, in order to keep the increased number of mechanics in constant employment, one carpet manufacturer after another must displace workmen by machines.
As a matter of fact the apologists do not mean this sort of setting free.
They have in their minds the means of subsistence of the liberated work-people.
The mode of expression, you see, is everything.
That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the workmen must come together again, and that, then, the compensation is complete.
That the sufferings of the workmen displaced by machinery are therefore as transient as are the riches of this world.
These means, therefore, were to them, not capital, but commodities, and they, as regards these commodities, were not wage-labourers, but buyers.
The circumstance that they were “freed” by the machinery, from the means of purchase, changed them from buyers into non-buyers.
Hence a lessened demand for those commodities — voilà tout.
If this diminution be not compensated by an increase from some other quarter, the market price of the commodities falls.
If this state of things lasts for some time, and extends, there follows a discharge of workmen employed in the production of these commodities.
Some of the capital that was previously devoted to production of necessary means of subsistence, has to become reproduced in another form.
While prices fall, and capital is being displaced, the labourers employed in the production of necessary means of subsistence are in their turn “freed” from a part of their wages.
For the present I will only say this: The labourers that are thrown out of work in any branch of industry, can no doubt seek for employment in some other branch.
And even should they find employment, what a poor look-out is theirs!
Further, every branch of industry attracts each year a new stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion.
It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not responsible for “setting free” the workman from the means of subsistence.
It cheapens and increases production in that branch which it seizes on, and at first makes no change in the mass of the means of subsistence produced in other branches.
And this is the point relied on by our apologists!
The contradictions and antagonisms inseparable from the capitalist employment of machinery, do not exist, they say, since they do not arise out of machinery, as such, but out of its capitalist employment!
Thus he saves himself from all further puzzling of the brain, and what is more, implicitly declares his opponent to be stupid enough to contend against, not the capitalistic employment of machinery, but machinery itself.
No doubt he is far from denying that temporary inconvenience may result from the capitalist use of machinery.
But where is the medal without its reverse!
Any employment of machinery, except by capital, is to him an impossibility.
Exploitation of the workman by the machine is therefore, with him, identical with exploitation of the machine by the workman.
Whoever, therefore, exposes the real state of things in the capitalistic employment of machinery, is against its employment in any way, and is an enemy of social progress!
Exactly the reasoning of the celebrated Bill Sykes.
“Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the throat of this commercial traveller has been cut.
But that is not my fault, it is the fault of the knife.
Must we, for such a temporary inconvenience, abolish the use of the knife?
Is it not as salutary in surgery, as it is knowing in anatomy?
And in addition a willing help at the festive board?
If you abolish the knife — you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism.
Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in those industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, notwithstanding this, bring about an increase of employment in other industries.
This effect, however, has nothing in common with the so-called theory of compensation.
In the quadrupled product there lies four times as much raw material.
Hence the production of raw material must be quadrupled.
Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, the immediate effect is to increase production in the other industries that furnish the first with means of production.
How far employment is thereby found for an increased number of men, depends, given the length of the working-day and the intensity of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, i.
This ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing on, those trades.
A new type of workman springs into life along with the machine, namely, its maker.
We have already learnt that machinery has possessed itself even of this branch of production on a scale that grows greater every day.
Spinning by machinery, for example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that the hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time without increased outlay.
So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and needlewomen, went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing-machine.
In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively small number of workpeople, increases the mass of raw materials, intermediate products, instruments of labour, &c.
The factory system carries the social division of labour immeasurably further than does manufacture, for it increases the productiveness of the industries it seizes upon, in a far higher degree.
The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus-value and the mass of products in which surplus-value is embodied.
And, as the substances consumed by the capitalists and their dependents become more plentiful, so too do these orders of society.
Their growing wealth, and the relatively diminished number of workmen required to produce the necessaries of life beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and luxurious wants, the means of satisfying those wants.
A larger portion of the produce of society is changed into surplus-produce, and a larger part of the surplus-produce is supplied for consumption in a multiplicity of refined shapes.
In other words, the production of luxuries increases.
The refined and varied forms of the products are also due to new relations with the markets of the world, relations that are created by modern industry.
Owing to these relations with the markets of the world, the demand for labour increases in the carrying trades, which split up into numerous varieties.
Entirely new branches of production, creating new fields of labour, are also formed, as the direct result either of machinery or of the general industrial changes brought about by it.
But the place occupied by these branches in the general production is, even in the most developed countries, far from important.
The number of labourers that find employment in them is directly proportional to the demand, created by those industries, for the crudest form of manual labour.
The chief industries of this kind are, at present, gas-works, telegraphs, photography, steam navigation, and railways.
If we deduct from this population all who are too old or too young for work, all unproductive women, young persons and children, the “ideological” classes, such as government officials, priests, lawyers, soldiers, &c.
What a splendid result of the capitalist exploitation of machinery!
All political economists of any standing admit that the introduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the workmen in the old handicrafts and manufactures with which this machinery at first competes.
Almost all of them bemoan the slavery of the factory operative.
And what is the great trump-card that they play?
That machinery, after the horrors of the period of introduction and development have subsided, instead of diminishing, in the long run increases the number of the slaves of labour!
“showing how greatly the introduction of new machines had superseded the labour of preceding periods.
Hence the increase of the hands in these latter trades was merely a symptom of a diminution in the total number employed.
Suppose, for example, that in the old mode of production, a capital of £500 is employed weekly, two-fifths being constant and three-fifths variable capital, i.
On the introduction of machinery the composition of this capital becomes altered.
We will suppose it to consist of four-fifths constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only £100 is now laid out in labour-power.
Their numbers have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but relatively, i.
Hence, a relative decrease in the number of hands is consistent with an actual increase.
We assumed above that while the total capital increases, its composition remains the same, because the conditions of production remain constant.
But we have already seen that, with every advance in the use of machinery, the constant component of capital, that part which consists of machinery, raw material, &c.
We also know that in no other system of production is improvement so continuous, and the composition of the capital employed so constantly changing as in the factory system.
These changes are, however, continually interrupted by periods of rest, during which there is a mere quantitative extension of the factories on the existing technical basis.
During such periods the operatives increase in number.
This first period, during which machinery conquers its field of action, is of decisive importance owing to the extraordinary profits that it helps to produce.
The special advantages of this first period of fast and furious activity are felt in every branch of production that machinery invades.
On the one hand, the immediate effect of machinery is to increase the supply of raw material in the same way, for example, as the cotton gin augmented the production of cotton.
On the other hand, the cheapness of the articles produced by machinery, and the improved means of transport and communication furnish the weapons for conquering foreign markets.
By ruining handicraft production in other countries, machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of its raw material.
In this way East India was compelled to produce cotton, wool, hemp, jute, and indigo for Great Britain.
This revolution hangs together with radical changes in agriculture which we need not here further inquire into.
I give below a summary of the result.
The flour is given in quarters of corn.
The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation.
The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the employment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the operatives become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the industrial cycle.
Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of each in the markets.
This share is directly proportional to the cheapness of the product.
A necessary condition, therefore, to the growth of the number of factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of the amount of capital invested in mills.
This growth, however, is conditioned by the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle.
It is, besides, constantly interrupted by the technical progress that at one time virtually supplies the place of new workmen, at another, actually displaces old ones.
The workpeople are thus continually both repelled and attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time, constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill of the levies.
The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by taking a rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry.
During this period of 45 years the English manufacturers had a monopoly of machinery and of the markets of the world.
The new poor law furthers the migration of agricultural labourers into the factory districts.
The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dispense with dwelling upon it for a moment.
These small manufacturers mostly went to the wall.
The same fate would have overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved off only by the cotton famine.
Although they formed one-third of the total number of manufacturers, yet their mills absorbed a much smaller part of the capital invested in the cotton trade.
This refers to the cotton trade as a whole, and, of course, requires considerable modification for individual districts.
Only very few mills worked full time (60 hours a week), the remainder worked at intervals.
Even in this miserable state of things, however, the inventive spirit of the master never stood still, but was exercised in making deductions from wages.
These were to some extent inflicted as a penalty for defects in the finished article that were really due to his bad cotton and to his unsuitable machinery.
Moreover, where the manufacturer owned the cottages of the workpeople, he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount from these miserable wages.
“earning at the end of a fortnight’s full work 8s.
The minders took away the sum of 6s.
In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s.
Even when working short time the rent was frequently deducted from the wages of the operatives.
No wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine fever broke out.
But more characteristic than all this, was, the revolution that took place in the process of production at the expense of the workpeople.
Experimenta in corpore vili, like those of anatomists on frogs, were formally made.
Redgrave, “I have given the actual earnings of the operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that they earn the same amount week by week.
These experiments were not made solely at the expense of the workman’s means of subsistence.
His five senses also had to pay the penalty.
“The people who are employed in making up Surat cotton complain very much.
In the mixing, scribbling and carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the air passages, and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing.
Bronchitis is more prevalent owing to the dust.
Inflammatory sore throat is common, from the same cause.
Sickness and dyspepsia are produced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle.
“The trade is availing itself of this resource at present to an extent which is even discreditable.
I have heard on good authority of a cloth weighing 8 lbs.
In cloths of other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent.
There are also in the borough more youthful prostitutes than I have known for the last 25 years.
After 1833, the extension of the Asiatic markets is enforced by “destruction of the human race” (the wholesale extinction of Indian hand-loom weavers).
The condition of the adult male operatives, even during the years of prosperity, may be judged from the note subjoined.
We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the division of handicraft labour.
An example of the first sort is the mowing-machine; it replaces co-operation between mowers.
A striking example of the second kind, is the needle-making machine.
A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character.
Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of mechanical power.
This is effected by hiring steam-power, as is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of small caloric-engines, as in some branches of weaving.
In the Coventry silk weaving industry the experiment of “cottage factories” was tried.
In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine-house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms in the cottages.
In all cases the power was hired at so much per loom.
The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not.
The struggle between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted over 12 years.
It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cottage factories.
Wherever the nature of the process did not involve production on a large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making, steel-pen making, &c.
The transition is very difficult in those cases where the production of the article by manufacture consists, not of a series of graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected ones.
This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of steel-pen factories.
Along with the development of the factory system and of the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other branches of industry not only extends, but alters its character.
Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing industries first for one detail process, then for another.
Thus the solid crystal of their organisation, based on the old division of labour, becomes dissolved, and makes way for constant changes.
Independently of this, a radical change takes place in the composition of the collective labourer, a change of the persons working in combination.
That old-fashioned industry has now been converted into an outside department of the factory, the manufactory, or the warehouse.
The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is carried out in a more shameless manner in modern Manufacture than in the factory proper.
I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles laid down above.
As a matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with numerous instances given in the chapter on the working-day.
There they are to be seen in the unwholesome brass-foundries, button factories, enamelling, galvanising, and lackering works.
Owing to the excessive labour of their workpeople, both adult and non-adult, certain London houses where newspapers and books are printed, have got the ill-omened name of “slaughterhouses.
One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and the worst paid kinds of labour, and one on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags.
It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world.
They flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of South America, and from the Canary Islands.
But the chief sources of their supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Belgium, and Holland.
They are used for manure, for making bedflocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper.
The rag-sorters are the medium for the spread of small-pox and other infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims.
They work for the same number of hours, often longer, than the adults.
The work is hard and the summer heat increases the exhaustion.
A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living.
Each moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottage.
Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exceptionally 3 rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated.
These people are so exhausted after the day’s hard work, that neither the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed.
They become rough, foul-mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women.
Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings of decency and of shame with contempt.
During meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neighbouring canal.
Their heavy day’s work at length completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses.
That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among the whole of this class, is only natural.
“The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves.
You might as well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!
The description of the workshops, more especially those of the London printers and tailors, surpasses the most loathsome phantasies of our romance writers.
The effect on the health of the workpeople is self-evident.
“In my fourth Report (1863) I showed, how it is practically impossible for the workpeople to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz.
The life of myriads of workmen and workwomen is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never-ending physical suffering that their mere occupation begets.
In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state of health Dr.
I now come to the so-called domestic industry.
The state of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr.
This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the Free-trade bagmen of Germany.
The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England.
The branches that we are now about to examine, solely with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in manufactories or warehouses, fall into two divisions, viz.
The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and includes numerous sub-divisions.
The lace finishing is done either in what are called “mistresses’ houses,” or by women in their own houses, with or without the help of their children.
The women who keep the “mistresses’ houses” are themselves poor.
The mistresses take orders from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating demand of the business will allow.
The average age at which the children commence work is six years, but in many cases it is below five.
At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights.
In order to keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled or gagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter, to pull off their shoes.
Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever giving their fingers rest or glowering their motion.
If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a single moment.
The “long stick” is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the working hours are prolonged.
“The children gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupation that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the body.
When women and their children work at home, which now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possible, still worse.
This sort of work is given out within a circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham.
The cottages of the agricultural labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on.
The state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here repeated, save that instead of the “mistresses’ houses,” we find what are called “lace-schools,” kept by poor women in their cottages.
“The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cottages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in winter.
The over-crowding in these dens and the consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme.
Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages.
Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex.
In the place of the lace-schools we find here the “straw-plait schools.
The straw cuts their mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers.
Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom.
“The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commissioners, Mr.
White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction.
The wretched half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children.
The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, and leave them.
And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian country for Europe; so says at least Count Montalembert, certainly a competent authority on Christianity!
So also, when based on these methods, do the cheapening of commodities and capitalist exploitation in general.
An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by the production of wearing apparel.
Many of the smaller branches are not included in these figures.
We begin to understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic of machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which that machinery sets free.
The manufactures of this class owed their origin chiefly to the capitalist’s need of having at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of demand.
These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad foundation.
The hour struck for the advent of machinery.
The decisively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal degree the whole of the numberless branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailoring, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many others, is the sewing-machine.
Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches of trade.
Children of too tender an age are sent adrift.
The wage of the machine hands rises compared with that of the house-workers, many of whom belong to the poorest of the poor.
That of the better situated handicraftsman, with whom the machine competes, sinks.
The new machine hands are exclusively girls and young women.
With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heavier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young children.
The overpowering competition crushes the weakest of the manual labourers.
The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in London runs parallel with the extension of machine sewing.
Their occupation is unwholesome, owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as under the old system.
Wherever the sewing-machine locates itself in narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome influences.
The revolution in the industrial methods which is the necessary result of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a medley of transition forms.
In dressmaking, for instance, where the labour for the most part was already organised, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed merely a new factor in that manufacturing industry.
The system actually prevalent in England is, that the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his premises, and then distributes the produce of those machines for further manipulation amongst the domestic workers.
The variety of the transition forms, however, does not conceal the tendency to conversion into the factory system proper.
This tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, of previously separated branches of a trade.
This fate has already in part overtaken them.
The overproduction of sewing-machines themselves, causes their producers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out for so much a week, thus crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of machines.
Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all similar revolutions, the finishing blow.
At first, the use of steam power meets with mere technical difficulties, such as unsteadiness in the machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, &c.
This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which women, young persons and children are employed.
The compulsory regulation of the working-day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain age, &c.
On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an expansion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the furnaces, buildings, &c.
Unlimited exploitation of cheap labour-power is the sole foundation of their power to compete.
One of the essential conditions for the existence of the factory system, especially when the length of the working-day is fixed, is certainty in the result, i.
The statutory pauses in the working-day, moreover, imply the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the article undergoing the process of production.
No poison kills vermin with more certainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers.
No one made a greater outcry over “impossibilities” than our friends the earthenware manufacturers.
In 1864, however, they were brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every “impossibility” had vanished.
“The improved method,” called forth by the Act, “of making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, &c.
It has even considerably reduced the temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware.
The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers.
“The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report.
“The inconveniences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not arisen.
We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short, we produce more in the same time.
Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople themselves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour.
The habit of giving such orders becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and telegraphs.
“The extension of the railway system throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice.
Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet demand of the next season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the demand then.
In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails periodically during what is called the season, in consequence of sudden orders.
This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first threatened with the Factory Acts.
Although their industry more than any other depends on navigation, yet experience has given them the lie.
Since then, every pretended obstruction to business has been treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham.
Before passing to the consideration of the extension of that legislation in England, we shall shortly notice certain clauses contained in the Factory Acts, and not relating to the hours of work.
The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax industry has very much extended, and that, with that extension, the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased.
The accidents, both as regards number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history of machinery.
“The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the most fearful nature.
In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and either involves death, or a future of wretched incapacity and suffering.
The increase of mills in the country will, of course, extend these dreadful results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature.
I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills a vast sacrifice of life and limb would be averted.
What could possibly show better the character of the capitalist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for forcing upon it, by Acts of Parliament, the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and health?
The Act has improved the ventilation very much.
At the same time, this portion of the Act strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production, owing to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a certain point.
The very root of the capitalist mode of production, i.
Factory legislation is therefore brought to a deadlock before these 500 cubic feet of breathing space.
The sanitary officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500 cubic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of capital.
They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and other lung diseases among the workpeople are necessary conditions to the existence of capital.
Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indispensable condition to the employment of children.
The success of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of combining education and gymnastics with manual labour, and, consequently, of combining manual labour with education and gymnastics.
The factory inspectors soon found out by questioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although receiving only one half the education of the regular day scholars, yet learnt quite as much and often more.
“This can be accounted for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one half of the day, they are always fresh, and nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction.
It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who comes fresh and bright from his work.
Further information on this point will be found in Senior’s speech at the Social Science Congress at Edinburgh in 1863.
Modern industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by technical means the manufacturing division of labour, under which each man is bound hand and foot for life to a single detail-operation.
The antagonism between the manufacturing division of labour and the methods of modern industry makes itself forcibly felt.
In the English letter-press printing trade, for example, there existed formerly a system, corresponding to that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work.
They went through a course of teaching till they were finished printers.
To be able to read and write was for every one of them a requirement of their trade.
All this was changed by the printing machine.
A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary creatures.
As soon as they get too old for such child’s work, that is about 17 at the latest, they are discharged from the printing establishments.
Several attempts to procure them employment elsewhere, were rendered of no avail by their ignorance and brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation.
As with the division of labour in the interior of the manufacturing workshops, so it is with the division of labour in the interior of society.
The only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new raw material supplied by commerce, is the gradual alteration of the instruments of labour.
But their form, too, once definitely settled by experience, petrifies, as is proved by their being in many cases handed down in the same form by one generation to another during thousands of years.
A characteristic feature is, that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different trades were called “mysteries” (mystères); into their secrets none but those duly initiated could penetrate.
The principle which it pursued, of resolving each process into its constituent movements, without any regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, created the new modern science of technology.
The varied, apparently unconnected, and petrified forms of the industrial processes now resolved themselves into so many conscious and systematic applications of natural science to the attainment of given useful effects.
Modern industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a process as final.
The technical basis of that industry is therefore revolutionary, while all earlier modes of production were essentially conservative.
At the same time, it thereby also revolutionises the division of labour within the society, and incessantly launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one branch of production to another.
It becomes a question of life and death for society to adapt the mode of production to the normal functioning of this law.
But the historical development of the antagonisms, immanent in a given form of production, is the only way in which that form of production can be dissolved and a new form established.
“Ne sutor ultra crepidam” — this nec plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the steam-engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working-jeweller, Fulton, the steamship.
So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour in factories, manufactories, &c.
But when it comes to regulating the so-called “home-labour,” it is immediately viewed as a direct attack on the patria potestas, on parental authority.
The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking this step.
The rights of the children had to be proclaimed.
“It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of the evidence, that against no persons do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against their parents.
On this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries.
“As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the Messrs.
Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p.
Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before the commissioners of the Ch.
“As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place, lest others should be working later than him and getting away his orders.
Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people.
To get that far, another twenty years of experimentum in corpore vili had been required.
Already in 1840 a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the labour of children had been appointed.
Its Report, in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W.
It may be supposed that it describes the horrors of a past age.
But there is unhappily evidence that those horrors continue as intense as they were.
“Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein defined.
“the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having the control over, the child, young person or woman.
The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of vicious exceptions and cowardly compromises with the masters.
The Workshops’ Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who were charged with its execution.
The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regulation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from others by the exceptional characteristic that the interests of landlord and capitalist there join hands.
The antagonism of these two interests had been favourable to Factory legislation, while on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation on mines.
This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the ridiculously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed.
One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the “Report from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &c.
It is a thick folio volume in which the Report itself occupies only five lines to this effect; that the committee has nothing to say, and that more witnesses must be examined!
In this inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the cross-examiners, and among them are to be found both mine-owners and mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal miners.
The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit of capital, not to call for a few extracts from this Report.
For the sake of conciseness I have classified them.
I may also add that every question and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books.
Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards.
The adults work in two shifts, of eight hours each; but there is no alternation with the boys, on account of the expense (n.
The younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, &c.
Children and young persons are at present worse treated, and harder worked than at any previous period (n.
The miners demand almost unanimously an act of Parliament prohibiting the employment in mines of children under 14.
“Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the workman’s family?
Kinnaird: “Some of the boys are keepers of doors?
The examination of the witnesses on this subject is truly droll.
“Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the parents?
“Does there appear to be any desire on the part of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable them to go to school?
“If the State were to require that every child should be sent to school, would there be schools for the children to go to?
Their numbers have considerably increased during the last three or four years.
“What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of women?
I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her children.
Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised as much as 10 tons of stuff a day.
The degradation, in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme.
“With regard to coroner’s inquests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the proceedings at those inquests when accidents occur?
They are generally men who have no knowledge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like.
“If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man could discontinue working by giving 14 days’ notice?
And he finds it difficult to get employment in another mine?
In the district to which I belong there are not a sufficient number of inspectors.
“At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and the Home Secretary.
I believe that in many cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do so, where men’s lives are at stake.
This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: “Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an explosion?
These are the beauties of “free” capitalist production!
The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that regulates the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, and makes exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, responsible for so-called accidents.
The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and women, has published some very important reports.
Several attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a modified form, to agriculture have been made, but have so far resulted in complete failure.
All that I wish to draw attention to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the general application of those principles.
By the destruction of petty and domestic industries it destroys the last resort of the “redundant population,” and with it the sole remaining safety-valve of the whole social mechanism.
The revolution called forth by modern industry in agriculture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated later on.
In this place, we shall merely indicate a few results by way of anticipation.
In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it annihilates the peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and replaces him by the wage-labourer.
Thus the desire for social changes, and the class antagonisms are brought to the same level in the country as in the towns.
The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agriculture are replaced by scientific ones.
Capitalist production completely tears asunder the old bond of union which held together agriculture and manufacture in their infancy.
But at the same time it creates the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, viz.
By this action it destroys at the same time the health of the town labourer and the intellectual life of the rural labourer.
The dispersion of the rural labourers over larger areas breaks their power of resistance while concentration increases that of the town operatives.
In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the increased productiveness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power itself.
The more a country starts its development on the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for example, the more rapid is this process of destruction.
Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by sapping the original sources of all wealth — the soil and the labourer.
In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter VII.
So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the same labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on become separated.
When an individual appropriates natural objects for his livelihood, no one controls him but himself.
A single man cannot operate upon Nature without calling his own muscles into play under the control of his own brain.
As in the natural body head and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour of the hand with that of the head.
Later on they part company and even become deadly foes.
The product ceases to be the direct product of the individual, and becomes a social product, produced in common by a collective labourer, i.
As the co-operative character of the labour-process becomes more and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of productive labour, and of its agent the productive labourer, become extended.
In order to labour productively, it is no longer necessary for you to do manual work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer, and perform one of its subordinate functions.
The first definition given above of productive labour, a definition deduced from the very nature of the production of material objects, still remains correct for the collective labourer, considered as a whole.
But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually.
On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes narrowed.
Capitalist production is not merely the production of commodities, it is essentially the production of surplus-value.
The labourer produces, not for himself, but for capital.
It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce.
That labourer alone is productive, who produces surplus-value for the capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital.
That the latter has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory, does not alter the relation.
To be a productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune.
Hence their definition of a productive labourer changes with their comprehension of the nature of surplus-value.
Thus the Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that alone, they say, yields a surplus-value.
And they say so because, with them, surplus-value has no existence except in the form of rent.
It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value.
The latter presupposes that the working-day is already divided into two parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour.
In order to prolong the surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is produced in less time.
The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length of the working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises out and out the technical processes of labour, and the composition of society.
In the course of this development, the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital.
It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, in which surplus-labour is not extorted by direct compulsion from the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital.
In such forms capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the labour-process.
Finally, as is shown by modern “domestic industry,” some intermediate forms are here and there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is totally changed.
If, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital suffices for the production of absolute surplus-value, if, e.
Nay, more, the excessive prolongation of the working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern Industry.
It then becomes the general, socially predominant form of production.
From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative surplus-value appears illusory.
Relative surplus-value is absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the working-day beyond the labour-time necessary to the existence of the labourer himself.
Absolute surplus-value is relative, since it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, as will allow of the necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the working-day.
But if we keep in mind the behaviour of surplus-value, this appearance of identity vanishes.
Once the capitalist mode of production is established and become general, the difference between absolute and relative surplus-value makes itself felt, whenever there is a question of raising the rate of surplus-value.
If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means of subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time left in which to work gratis for others.
No mystical ideas must in any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically developed productiveness of labour.
At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired by labour is small, but so too are the wants which develop with and by the means of satisfying them.
Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives on the labour of others is infinitely small compared with the mass of direct producers.
Along with the progress in the productiveness of labour, that small portion of society increases both absolutely and relatively.
Besides, capital with its accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long process of development.
The productiveness of labour that serves as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not of nature, but of a history embracing thousands of centuries.
Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the form of social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered by physical conditions.
These are all referable to the constitution of man himself (race, &c.
The external physical conditions fall into two great economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.
At the dawn of civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher stage of development, it is the second.
Compare, for example, England with India, or in ancient times, Athens and Corinth with the shores of the Black Sea.
So much greater therefore can be the excess of his labours for others over his labour for himself.
Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient Egyptians.
“It is altogether incredible how little trouble and expense the bringing up of their children causes them.
Most of the children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild.
Hence a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas.
It is this, chiefly, which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, therefore, why so many great works can be undertaken.
Nevertheless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was freely disposable.
Just as the individual labourer can do more surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with regard to the working population.
The smaller the part of it which is required for the production of the necessary means of subsistence, so much the greater is the part that can be set to do other work.
But it by no means follows from this that the most fruitful soil is the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist mode of production.
This mode is based on the dominion of man over nature.
Where nature is too lavish, she “keeps him in hand, like a child in leading-strings.
It is not the tropics with their luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country of capital.
The secret of the flourishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works.
Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possibility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor, consequently, of surplus-value and a surplus-product.
These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits, i.
In proportion as industry advances, these natural limits recede.
But consider, for example, an inhabitant of the eastern islands of the Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests.
There, then, people go into the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut fire-wood.
Suppose now such an eastern bread-cutter requires 12 working hours a week for the satisfaction of all his wants.
Nature’s direct gift to him is plenty of leisure time.
Before he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers, compulsion is necessary.
If capitalist production were introduced, the honest fellow would perhaps have to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to himself the product of one working day.
It explains only why his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a week.
But in no case would his surplus-product arise from some occult quality inherent in human labour.
Thus, not only does the historically developed social productiveness of labour, but also its natural productiveness, appear to be productiveness of the capital with which that labour is incorporated.
Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus-value.
He treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of social production.
Whenever he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but the cause that determines the magnitude of that value.
On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed the productiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: Surplus-value).
Nevertheless, Ricardo’s school simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it.
In fact these bourgeois economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning question of the origin of surplus-value.
But what are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half a century after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched evasions of Ricardo’s earliest vulgarisers?
“The cause of profit is that labour produces more than is required for its support.
“To vary the form of the theorem; the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last longer than the time which was required to produce them.
He here confounds the duration of labour-time with the duration of its products.
According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only a day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a machine maker whose products endure for 20 years and more.
Of course it is very true, that if a bird’s nest did not last longer than the time it takes in building, birds would have to do without nests.
This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his own superiority over the mercantilists.
If there were no division of employments, there would be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit.
For Mill then, exchange, buying and selling, those general conditions of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there would always be profits even without the purchase and sale of labour-power!
“If,” he continues, “the labourers of the country collectively produce twenty per cent more than their wages, profits will be twenty per cent, whatever prices may or may not be.
On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that “profits will be 20%.
Then follows a splendid example of Mill’s method of handling the different historical forms of social production.
Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth.
“that he should do so is not a matter of inherent necessity.
But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds necessary for carrying it on.
Mill might have gone further and have added, that the labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of life but also the means of production, is in reality nothing but his own wage-labourer.
He might also have said that the American peasant proprietor is but a serf who does enforced labour for himself instead of for his lord.
“And even in the former case” (when the workman is a wage labourer to whom the capitalist advances all the necessaries of life, he the labourer), “may be looked upon in the same light,” (i.
In reality, the labourer advances his labour gratuitously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market price at the end of the week, &c.
On the level plain, simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by the altitude of its great intellects.
The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the necessaries of life habitually required by the average labourer.
The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude.
What changes, is the value of this quantity.
There are, besides, two other factors that enter into the determination of the value of labour-power.
One, the expenses of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode of production; the other, its natural diversity, the difference between the labour-power of men and women, of children and adults.
Both these factors, however, are excluded in the following investigation.
Very different combinations are clearly possible, according as one of the three factors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one variable, or lastly, all three simultaneously variable.
And the number of these combinations is augmented by the fact that, when these factors simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their respective variations may differ.
In what follows the chief combinations alone are considered.
On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by three laws.
A variation in the productiveness of labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the value of labour-power, and in the same direction in surplus-value.
The value created by a working day of 12 hours is a constant quantity, say, six shillings.
This constant quantity is the sum of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which latter value the labourer replaces by an equivalent.
It is self-evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts, neither of them can increase without the other diminishing.
Under these circumstances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute magnitude, either of the surplus-value, or of the value of labour-power, without a simultaneous change in their relative magnitudes, i.
It is impossible for them to rise or fall simultaneously.
Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and consequently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise in the productiveness of labour.
They do increase or diminish by the same quantity.
But their proportional increase or diminution depends on their original magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour took place.
But the proportional change of magnitude is different in each case.
According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of surplus-value, presupposes a movement in the value of labour-power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the productiveness of labour.
The limit of this change is given by the altered value of labour-power.
Nevertheless, even when circumstances allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements may occur.
The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a given quantity of necessaries.
It is the value and not the mass of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour.
The only result would be that each of them would represent twice as many use-values as before; these use-values being twice as cheap as before.
Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, it would be above its value.
If, however, the price of labour-power had fallen, not to 1s.
But even in such case, the fall in the value of labour-power would cause a corresponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between the labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep widening.
Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have above stated.
But he falls into the following errors: (1) he looks upon the special conditions under which these laws hold good as the general and sole conditions of capitalist production.
He knows no change, either in the length of the working-day, or in the intensity of labour; consequently with him there can be only one variable factor, viz.
He therefore confounds together the laws of the rate of surplus-value and the laws of the rate of profit.
Assume that a capital C of £500 is made up of raw material, instruments of labour, &c.
It is, besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circumstances that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value.
Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure of labour in a given time.
Hence a working-day of more intense labour is embodied in more products than is one of less intense labour, the length of each day being the same.
Increased productiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply more products in a given working-day.
Here we have an increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their individual prices: as their number increases, so does the sum of their prices.
But in the case of increased productiveness, a given value is spread over a greater mass of products.
Hence the length of the working-day being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be incorporated in an increased value, and, the value of money remaining unchanged, in more money.
The value created varies with the extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its normal intensity in the society.
Here, the rise in the price of labour-power does not necessarily imply that the price has risen above the value of labour-power.
On the contrary, the rise in price may be accompanied by a fall in value.
This occurs whenever the rise in the price of labour-power does not compensate for its increased wear and tear.
In the present case this condition no longer applies.
But still, even then, the intensity of labour would be different in different countries, and would modify the international application of the law of value.
The more intense working-day of one nation would be represented by a greater sum of money than would the less intense day of another nation.
It may be made either longer or shorter.
From our present data, and within the limits of the assumptions made on p.
Every change in this absolute value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus-value.
We begin with the case in which the working-day is shortened.
Along with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.
Only by lowering the price of labour-power below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless.
If, now, the working-day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power remain unaltered, the surplus-value increases both absolutely and relatively.
Although there is no absolute change in the value of labour-power, it suffers a relative fall.
Here, on the contrary, the change of relative magnitude in the value of labour-power is the result of the change of absolute magnitude in surplus-value.
This simultaneous increase is therefore possible in two cases, one, the actual lengthening of the working-day, the other, an increase in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such lengthening.
When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour-power may fall below its value, although that price be nominally unchanged or even rise.
Up to a certain point, the increased wear and tear of labour-power, inseparable from a lengthened working-day, may be compensated by higher wages.
But beyond this point the wear and tear increases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable for the normal reproduction and functioning of labour-power is suppressed.
The price of labour-power and the degree of its exploitation cease to be commensurable quantities.
It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here possible.
Any two of the factors may vary and the third remain constant, or all three may vary at once.
They may vary either in the same or in different degrees, in the same or in opposite directions, with the result that the variations counteract one another, either wholly or in part.
Nevertheless the analysis of every possible case is easy in view of the results given in I.
The effect of every possible combination may be found by treating each factor in turn as variable, and the other two constant for the time being.
We shall, therefore, notice, and that briefly, but two important cases.
If the day be lengthened by 2 hours, i.
If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz.
But, as a matter of fact, surplus-value had at that time, thanks to the increased intensity of labour, and to the prolongation of the working-day, increased both in absolute and relative magnitude.
Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, both have a like effect.
They both augment the mass of articles produced in a given time.
Both, therefore, shorten that portion of the working-day which the labourer needs to produce his means of subsistence or their equivalent.
The minimum length of the working-day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of it.
If the whole working-day were to shrink to the length of this portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consummation utterly impossible under the régime of capital.
Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the working-day be reduced to the necessary labour time.
But, even in that case, the latter would extend its limits.
On the one hand, because the notion of “means of subsistence” would considerably expand, and the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life.
On the other hand, because a part of what is now surplus-labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation.
The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more can the working-day be shortened; and the more the working-day is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase.
In this direction, the shortening of the working-day finds at last a limit in the generalisation of labour.
In capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting the whole life-time of the masses into labour time.
The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, that which, in the third, is represented as a ratio of the times during which those values are produced.
These formulae, supplementary the one to the other, are rigorously definite and correct.
We therefore find them substantially, but not consciously, worked out in classical Political Economy.
There we meet with the following derivative formulae.
One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of labour-times, of the values in which those labour-times are embodied, and of the products in which those values exist.
It is of course understood that, by “Value of the Product,” is meant only the value newly created in a working-day, the constant part of the value of the product being excluded.
Then, making the same assumptions as in former instances, the real degree of exploitation of labour will be represented in the following proportions.
These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the proportion in which the working-day, or the value produced by it, is divided between capitalist and labourer.
If they are to be treated as direct expressions of the degree of self-expansion of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good: Surplus-labour or surplus-value can never reach 100%.
In order that the surplus-labour may absorb the whole day (i.
But if the necessary labour vanish, so too does the surplus-labour, since it is only a function of the former.
But not so the rate of surplus-value, the real degree of exploitation of labour.
The favorite method of treating the working-day as constant in magnitude became, through the use of formulae II.
The same holds good when the repartition of the value produced is exclusively kept in sight.
The working-day that has already been realized in given value, must necessarily be a day of given length.
Instead of the real fact, we have false semblance of an association, in which labourer and capitalist divide the product in proportion to the different elements which they respectively contribute towards its formation.
The capitalist pays the value, so far as price coincides with value, of the labour-power, and receives in exchange the disposal of the living labour-power itself.
During one the labourer produces a value that is only equal to the value of his labour-power; he produces its equivalent.
Thus the capitalist receives in return for his advance of the price of the labour-power, a product ready made in the market.
During the other period, the period of surplus-labour, the usufruct of the labour-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs him no equivalent.
This expenditure of labour-power comes to him gratis.
In this sense it is that surplus-labour can be called unpaid labour.
Capital, therefore, is not only, as Adam Smith says, the command over labour.
It is essentially the command over unpaid labour.
All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, interest, or rent), it may subsequently crystallize into, is in substance the materialization of unpaid labour.
The secret of the self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal of a definite quantity of other people’s unpaid labour.
On the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer appears as the price of labour, a certain quantity of money that is paid for a certain quantity of labour.
Thus people speak of the value of labour and call its expression in money its necessary or natural price.
On the other hand they speak of the market-prices of labour, i.
But what is the value of a commodity?
The objective form of the social labour expended in its production.
And how do we measure the quantity of this value?
By the quantity of the labour contained in it.
In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour must at all events exist before it is sold.
But, could the labourer give it an independent objective existence, he would sell a commodity and not labour.
Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, i.
The working-day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.
In this case he produces no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s.
But it is on this very basis that he sells his labour and that his labour is wage-labour.
This equalization of unequal quantities not merely does away with the determination of value.
Such a self-destructive contradiction cannot be in any way even enunciated or formulated as a law.
It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour against less, from their difference of form, the one being realized, the other living.
This is the more absurd as the value of a commodity is determined not by the quantity of labour actually realized in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary for its production.
If an invention is made by which it can be produced in 3 hours, the value, even of the commodity already produced, falls by half.
It is the quantity of labour required for its production, not the realized form of that labour, by which the amount of the value of a commodity is determined.
That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of money on the market, is in fact not labour, but the labourer.
As soon as his labour actually begins, it has already ceased to belong to him; it can therefore no longer be sold by him.
Labour is the substance, and the immanent measure of value, but has itself no value.
In the expression “value of labour,” the idea of value is not only completely obliterated, but actually reversed.
It is an expression as imaginary as the value of the earth.
These imaginary expressions, arise, however, from the relations of production themselves.
They are categories for the phenomenal forms of essential relations.
That in their appearance things often represent themselves in inverted form is pretty well known in every science except Political Economy.
Classical Political Economy borrowed from every-day life the category “price of labour” without further criticism, and then simply asked the question, how is this price determined?
It soon recognized that the change in the relations of demand and supply explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other commodities, nothing except its changes i.
If demand and supply balance, the oscillation of prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the same.
But then demand and supply also cease to explain anything.
The price of labour, at the moment when demand and supply are in equilibrium, is its natural price, determined independently of the relation of demand and supply.
And how this price is determined is just the question.
Or a larger period of oscillations in the market-price is taken, e.
This had naturally to be determined otherwise than by its own compensating variations.
In this way Political Economy expected to penetrate athwart the accidental prices of labour, to the value of labour.
As with other commodities, this value was determined by the cost of production.
But what is the cost of production – of the labourer, i.
This question unconsciously substituted itself in Political Economy for the original one; for the search after the cost of production of labour as such turned in a circle and never left the spot.
Classical economy never arrived at a consciousness of the results of its own analysis; it accepted uncritically the categories “value of labour,” “natural price of labour,” &c.
Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, present themselves in this transformed condition as wages.
We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated upon a certain length of the labourer’s life, to which, again, corresponds a certain length of working-day.
If, now, this value of a day’s labour-power is expressed as the value of a day’s labour itself, we have the formula: Twelve hours’ labour has a value of 3s.
The value of labour-power thus determines the value of labour, or, expressed in money, its necessary price.
If, on the other hand, the price of labour-power differs from its value, in like manner the price of labour differs from its so-called value.
The value which the labour-power produces is, on the other hand, 6s.
Thus, we have a result absurd at first sight that labour which creates a value of 6s.
The wage form thus extinguishes every trace of the division of the working-day into necessary labour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid labour.
In the corvée, the labour of the worker for himself, and his compulsory labour for his lord, differ in space and time in the clearest possible way.
All the slave’s labour appears as unpaid labour.
In wage labour, on the contrary, even surplus-labour, or unpaid labour, appears as paid.
There the property-relation conceals the labour of the slave for himself; here the money-relation conceals the unrequited labour of the wage labourer.
Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the transformation of value and price of labour-power into the form of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself.
If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the mystery of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is more easy to understand than the necessity, the raison d’etre, of this phenomenon.
The exchange between capital and labour at first presents itself to the mind in the same guise as the buying and selling of all other commodities.
The buyer gives a certain sum of money, the seller an article of a nature different from money.
The jurist’s consciousness recognizes in this, at most, a material difference, expressed in the juridically equivalent formula: “Do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias.
Furthermore, exchange-value and use-value, being intrinsically incommensurable magnitudes, the expressions “value of labour,” “price of labour,” do not seem more irrational than the expressions “value of cotton,” “price of cotton.
In its function of means of payment, money realizes subsequently the value or price of the article supplied – i.
Finally, the use-value supplied by the labourer to the capitalist is not, in fact, his labour-power, but its function, some definite useful labour, the work of tailoring, shoemaking, spinning, &c.
That this same labour is, on the other hand, the universal value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by which it differs from all other commodities, is beyond the cognizance of the ordinary mind.
Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he receives appears to him, therefore, necessarily as a change in the value or price of his 12 hours’ work.
Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist.
He wishes to receive as much labour as possible for as little money as possible.
Practically, therefore, the only thing that interests him is the difference between the price of labour-power and the value which its function creates.
But, then, he tries to buy all commodities as cheaply as possible, and always accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying under, and selling over the value.
Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents phenomena which seem to prove that not the value of labour-power is paid, but the value of its function, of labour itself.
We may reduce these phenomena to two great classes: 1.
One might as well conclude that not the value of a machine is paid, but that of its working, because it costs more to hire a machine for a week than for a day.
We find this individual difference, but are not deceived by it, in the system of slavery, where, frankly and openly, without any circumlocution, labour-power itself is sold.
For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, “value and price of labour,” or “wages,” as contrasted with the essential relation manifested therein, viz.
The former appear directly and spontaneously as current modes of thought; the latter must first be discovered by science.
Classical Political Economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, however, consciously formulating it.
This it cannot, so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin.
Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recognizable in the ordinary economic treatises which, exclusively interested in the material side of the question, neglect every difference of form.
An exposition of all these forms however, belongs to the special study of wage labour, not therefore to this work.
Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly worked out here.
The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place for a definite period of time.
The converted form under which the daily, weekly, &c.
Similarly the distinction between the exchange-value of labour power, and the sum of the necessaries of life into which this value is converted, now reappears as the distinction between nominal and real wages.
It would be useless to repeat here, with regard to the phenomenal form, what has been already worked out in the substantial form.
We limit ourselves therefore to a few points characteristic of time-wages.
The sum of money which the labourer receives for his daily or weekly labour, forms the amount of his nominal wages, or of his wages estimated in value.
We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again distinguish between the sum-total of the daily or weekly wages, &c.
The average price of labour is found, when the average daily value of the labour-power is divided by the average number of hours in the working-day.
The price of the working-hour thus found serves as the unit measure for the price of labour.
It follows therefore that the daily and weekly wages, &c.
Daily or weekly wages remain, despite all this, unchanged.
On the contrary, the daily or weekly wages may rise, although the price of labour remains constant or even falls.
The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive amount of labour, its intensive amount increased.
The rise of the nominal daily or weekly wages may therefore be accompanied by a price of labour that remains stationary or falls.
There are, therefore, methods of lowering the price of labour independent of the reduction of the nominal daily or weekly wages.
As a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily or weekly labour, &c.
Given, on the other hand, the price of labour, the daily or weekly wages depend on the quantity of the daily or weekly labour.
The unit-measure for time-wages, the price of the working-hour, is the quotient of the value of a day’s labour-power, divided by the number of hours of the average working-day.
Under these circumstances the price of a working hour is 3d.
In previous chapters we saw the destructive consequences of over-work; here we find the sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his insufficient employment.
The connection between the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed.
The capitalist can now wring from the labourer a certain quantity of surplus-labour without allowing him the labour-time necessary for his own subsistence.
He can annihilate all regularity of employment, and according to his own convenience, caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the most enormous overwork alternate with relative or absolute cessation of work.
He can, under the pretense of paying “the normal price of labour,” abnormally lengthen the working-day without any corresponding compensation to the labourer.
Hence the perfectly rational revolt in 1860 of the London labourers, employed in the building trades, against the attempt of the capitalists to impose on them this sort of wage by the hour.
With an increasing daily or weekly wage the price of labour may remain nominally constant, and yet may fall below its normal level.
This occurs every time that, the price of labour (reckoned per working-hour) remaining constant, the working-day is prolonged beyond its customary length.
The value of labour-power, as dependent on its wear and tear, increases with the duration of its functioning, and in more rapid proportion than the increase of that duration.
Beyond this limit the working-time is over-time, and is, taking the hour as unit-measure, paid better (“extra pay”), although often in a proportion ridiculously small.
The normal working-day exists here as a fraction of the actual working-day, and the latter, often during the whole year, lasts longer than the former.
Legal limitation of the working-day puts an end to these amenities.
It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working-days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the wages.
The lowness of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the extension of the labour-time.
On the other hand, the extension of the working-time produces, in its turn, a fall in the price of labour, and with this a fall in the day’s or week’s wages.
Soon, however, this command over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.
A part of the price of the commodity consists of the price of labour.
The unpaid part of the labour-price need not be reckoned in the price of the commodity.
This is the first step to which competition leads.
The second step to which it drives is to exclude also from the selling price of the commodity at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working-day.
This movement is simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not belong to this part of our subject.
Nevertheless, the capitalist may, for a moment, speak for himself.
The competition among the master bakers is the cause of the difficulty in getting rid of night-work.
A large number of those employed by the undersellers are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any wages they can obtain.
This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows how the appearance only of the relations of production mirrors itself in the brain of the capitalist.
The capitalist does not know that the normal price of labour also includes a definite quantity of unpaid labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of his gain.
The category of surplus labour-time does not exist at all for him, since it is included in the normal working-day, which he thinks he has paid for in the day’s wages.
But over-time does exist for him, the prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits corresponding with the usual price of labour.
Face to face with his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for this over-time.
He again does not know that this extra pay includes unpaid labour, just as well as does the price of the customary hour of labour.
In the first case the capitalist appropriates to himself one-half, in the second, one-third of the working-hour without paying for it.
Wages by the piece are nothing else than a converted form of wages by time, just as wages by time are a converted form of the value or price of labour-power.
The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to receive a first severe shock from the fact that both forms of wages exist side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches of industry; e.
“the compositors of London, as a general rule, work by the piece, time-work being the exception, while those in the country work by the day, the exception being work by the piece.
The shipwrights of the port of London work by the job or piece, while those of all other parts work by the day.
In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same work, piece wages are paid to the French, time-wages to the English.
In the regular factories in which throughout piece wages predominate, particular kinds of work are unsuitable to this form of wage, and are therefore paid by time.
Then the value of these 24 pieces, after.
The form of piece wages is just as irrational as that of time-wages.
Whilst in our example two pieces of a commodity, after subtraction of the value of the means of production consumed in them, are worth 6d.
Piece wages do not, in fact, distinctly express any relation of value.
In time-wages, the labour is measured by its immediate duration; in piece wages, by the quantity of products in which the labour has embodied itself during a given time.
The price of labour time itself is finally determined by the equation: value of a day’s labour = daily value of labour-power.
Piece-wage is, therefore, only a modified form of time-wage.
Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic peculiarities of piece wages.
The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work itself, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is to be paid in full.
Piece wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating.
They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the intensity of labour.
Only the working-time which is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand, and experimentally fixed, counts as socially necessary working-time, and is paid as such.
In the larger workshops of the London tailors, therefore, a certain piece of work, a waistcoat, e.
By practice it is known how much is the average product of one hour.
If the labourer does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in consequence supply a certain minimum of work per day, he is dismissed.
Since the quality and intensity of the work are here controlled by the form of wage itself, superintendence of labour becomes in great part superfluous.
Piece wages therefore lay the foundation of the modern “domestic labour,” described above, as well as of a hierarchically organized system of exploitation and oppression.
On the one hand, piece wages facilitate the interposition of parasites between the capitalist and the wage-labourer, the “sub-letting of labour.
In England this system is characteristically called the “sweating system.
The exploitation of the labourer by capital is here effected through the exploitation of the labourer by the labourer.
Given piece-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourer to strain his labour-power as intensely as possible; this enables the capitalist to raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of labour.
It is moreover now the personal interest of the labourer to lengthen the working-day, since with it his daily or weekly wages rise.
With regard to actual receipts there is, therefore, great variety according to the different skill, strength, energy, staying-power, &c.
Of course this does not alter the general relations between capital and wage-labour.
Second, the proportion between wages and surplus-value remains unaltered, since the mass of surplus labour supplied by each particular labourer corresponds with the wage received by him.
Piece-work has, therefore, a tendency, while raising individual wages above the average, to lower this average itself.
Piece-wage is finally one of the chief supports of the hour-system described in the preceding chapter.
From what has been shown so far, it follows that piece-wage is the form of wages most in harmony with the capitalist mode of production.
Here we find documentary evidence of the constant lowering of the price of labour from the beginning of the anti-Jacobin War.
“The real earnings of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were; his superiority over the common labourer, which at first was very great, has now almost entirely ceased.
“By far the greater part of agricultural operations is done by people who are hired for the day or on piece-work.
“I confess that I see, with misgiving, the great extension of the practice of piece-wage.
In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece wages become the general rule, because capital can there only increase the efficacy of the working-day by intensifying labour.
With the changing productiveness of labour the same quantum of product represents a varying working-time.
Therefore, piece-wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a determined working-time.
In other words, piece-wage is lowered in the same proportion as the number of the pieces produced in the same time rises, and, therefore, as the working time spent on the same piece falls.
This change in piece-wage, so far purely nominal, leads to constant battles between capitalist and labour.
Either because the capitalist uses it as a pretext for actually lowering the price of labour, or because increased productive power of labour is accompanied by an increased intensity of the same.
Or because the labourer takes seriously the appearance of piece wages (viz.
The capitalist rightly knocks on the head such pretensions as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour.
He cries out against this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of industry, and declares roundly that the productiveness of labour does not concern the labourer at all.
In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold combinations which may bring about a change in magnitude of the value of labour-power — this magnitude being considered either absolutely or relatively, i.
As has been already said, the simple translation of the value, or respectively of the price, of labour-power into the exoteric form of wages transforms all these laws into laws of the fluctuations of wages.
That which appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single country as a series of varying combinations, may appear in different countries as contemporaneous difference of national wages.
Even the most superficial comparison requires the reduction first of the average day-wage for the same trades, in different countries, to a uniform working-day.
After this reduction to the same terms of the day-wages, time-wage must again be translated into piece-wage, as the latter only can be a measure both of the productivity and the intensity of labour.
Only a degree of intensity above the national average affects, in a given country, the measure of value by the mere duration of the working-time.
This is not the case on the universal market, whose integral parts are the individual countries.
The average intensity of labour changes from country to country; here it is greater, there less.
These national averages form a scale, whose unit of measure is the average unit of universal labour.
The more intense national labour, therefore, as compared with the less intense, produces in the same time more value, which expresses itself in more money.
In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a country, in the same proportion do the national intensity and productivity of labour there rise above the international level.
The different quantities of commodities of the same kind, produced in different countries in the same working-time, have, therefore, unequal international values, which are expressed in different prices, i.
The relative value of money will, therefore, be less in the nation with more developed capitalist mode of production than in the nation with less developed.
But even apart from these relative differences of the value of money in different countries, it will be found, frequently, that the daily or weekly, etc.
“in England wages are virtually lower to the capitalist, though higher to the operative than on the Continent of Europe.
The English Factory Inspector, Alexander Redgrave, in his report of Oct.
Redgrave gives very full details as to the Russian cotton factories.
The data were given him by an English manager until recently employed there.
On this Russian soil, so fruitful of all infamies, the old horrors of the early days of English factories are in full swing.
The managers are, of course, English, as the native Russian capitalist is of no use in factory business.
Despite all over-work, continued day and night, despite the most shameful under-payment of the workpeople, Russian manufacture manages to vegetate only by prohibition of foreign competition.
I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of Mr.
Redgrave’s, on the average number of spindles per factory and per spinner in the different countries of Europe.
He himself remarks that he had collected these figures a few years ago, and that since that time the size of the factories and the number of spindles per labourer in England has increased.
He supposes, however, an approximately equal progress in the continental countries mentioned, so that the numbers given would still have their value for purposes of comparison.
Compelled by practical necessity, they thus have had to take into account the national difference in the intensity of labour, but this has brought them no loss.
Their experience shows that even if the height of wages corresponds more or less with the average intensity of labour, the relative price of labour varies generally in the inverse direction.
In an “Essay on the Rate of Wages,” one of his first economic writings, H.
The best of it is that he does not assert that things actually are as they ought to be according to his theory.
For State intervention has falsified the natural economic relations.
The different national wages must be reckoned, therefore, as if that part of each that goes to the State in the form of taxes, came to the labourer himself.
Carey to consider further whether those “State expenses” are not the “natural” fruits of capitalistic development?
Finally he discovered that it is, in the last resort, commerce that destroys the inborn beauties and harmonies of the capitalist mode of production.
A step further and he will, perhaps, discover that the one evil in capitalist production is capital itself.
The conversion of a sum of money into means of production and labour-power, is the first step taken by the quantum of value that is going to function as capital.
This conversion takes place in the market, within the sphere of circulation.
These commodities must then be thrown into circulation.
They must be sold, their value realised in money, this money afresh converted into capital, and so over and over again.
This circular movement, in which the same phases are continually gone through in succession, forms the circulation of capital.
The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist must have contrived to sell his commodities, and to reconvert into capital the greater part of the money so received.
In the following pages we shall assume that capital circulates in its normal way.
The detailed analysis of the process will be found in Book II.
He has to share it with capitalists, with landowners, &c.
Its fragments fall to various categories of persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the other, such as profit, interest, merchants’ profit, rent, &c.
On the other hand, we treat the capitalist producer as owner of the entire surplus-value, or, better perhaps, as the representative of all the sharers with him in the booty.
We, therefore, first of all consider accumulation from an abstract point of view — i.
So far as accumulation takes place, the capitalist must have succeeded in selling his commodities, and in reconverting the sale-money into capital.
Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus-value into fragments neither alters its nature nor the conditions under which it becomes an element of accumulation.
Whatever be the proportion of surplus-value which the industrial capitalist retains for himself, or yields up to others, he is the one who, in the first instance, appropriates it.
We, therefore, assume no more than what actually takes place.
On the other hand, the simple fundamental form of the process of accumulation is obscured by the incident of the circulation which brings it about, and by the splitting up of surplus-value.
An exact analysis of the process, therefore, demands that we should, for a time, disregard all phenomena that hide the play of its inner mechanism.
Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must be a continuous process, must continue to go periodically through the same phases.
A society can no more cease to produce than it can cease to consume.
When viewed, therefore, as a connected whole, and as flowing on with incessant renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, a process of reproduction.
The conditions of production are also those of reproduction.
No society can go on producing, in other words, no society can reproduce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into means of production, or elements of fresh products.
All other circumstances remaining the same, the only mode by which it can reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, is by replacing the means of production — i.
Hence, a definite portion of each year’s product belongs to the domain of production.
Destined for productive consumption from the very first, this portion exists, for the most part, in the shape of articles totally unfitted for individual consumption.
If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduction.
Just as in the former the labour process figures but as a means towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it figures but as a means of reproducing as capital — i.
It is only because his money constantly functions as capital that the economic guise of a capitalist attaches to a man.
As a periodic increment of the capital advanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value acquires the form of a revenue flowing out of capital.
If this revenue serve the capitalist only as a fund to provide for his consumption, and be spent as periodically as it is gained, then, caeteris paribus, simple reproduction will take place.
But the labourer is not paid until after he has expended his labour-power, and realised in commodities not only its value, but surplus-value.
Hence, that formula of the economists, referred to in Chapter XVIII, which represents wages as a share in the product itself.
What flows back to the labourer in the shape of wages is a portion of the product that is continuously reproduced by him.
The capitalist, it is true, pays him in money, but this money is merely the transmuted form of the product of his labour.
While he is converting a portion of the means of production into products, a portion of his former product is being turned into money.
It is his labour of last week, or of last year, that pays for his labour-power this week or this year.
The illusion begotten by the intervention of money vanishes immediately, if, instead of taking a single capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capitalists and the class of labourers as a whole.
The capitalist class is constantly giving to the labouring class order-notes, in the form of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the latter and appropriated by the former.
The labourers give these order-notes back just as constantly to the capitalist class, and in this way get their share of their own product.
The transaction is veiled by the commodity form of the product and the money form of the commodity.
If the labour-fund constantly flows to him in the form of money that pays for his labour, it is because the product he has created moves constantly away from him in the form of capital.
But all this does not alter the fact, that it is the labourer’s own labour, realised in a product, which is advanced to him by the capitalist.
Let us take a peasant liable to do compulsory service for his lord.
He works on his own land, with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week.
The 3 other days he does forced work on the lord’s domain.
He constantly reproduces his own labour-fund, which never, in his case, takes the form of a money payment for his labour, advanced by another person.
But in return, his unpaid forced labour for the lord, on its side, never acquires the character of voluntary paid labour.
As before, he will use up the means of production as means of production, and transfer their value to the product.
As before, a definite portion of the product will be devoted to reproduction.
Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a value advanced out of the capitalist’s funds, when we view the process of capitalist production in the flow of its constant renewal.
But that process must have had a beginning of some kind.
However this may be, the mere continuity of the process, the simple reproduction, brings about some other wonderful changes, which affect not only the variable, but the total capital.
The capitalist thinks, that he is consuming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.
It is true, he has in hand a capital whose amount has not changed, and of which a part, viz.
But what we have to do with here, is not the material elements, but the value, of that capital.
When a person gets through all his property, by taking upon himself debts equal to the value of that property, it is clear that his property represents nothing but the sum total of his debts.
Not a single atom of the value of his old capital continues to exist.
Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of the process of production, in other words simple reproduction, sooner or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into accumulated capital, or capitalised surplus-value.
The separation of labour from its product, of subjective labour-power from the objective conditions of labour, was therefore the real foundation in fact, and the starting-point of capitalist production.
But that which at first was but a starting-point, becomes, by the mere continuity of the process, by simple reproduction, the peculiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, of capitalist production.
On the one hand, the process of production incessantly converts material wealth into capital, into means of creating more wealth and means of enjoyment for the capitalist.
On the other hand, the labourer, on quitting the process, is what he was on entering it, a source of wealth, but devoid of all means of making that wealth his own.
This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine quâ non of capitalist production.
While producing he consumes by his labour the means of production, and converts them into products with a higher value than that of the capital advanced.
It is at the same time consumption of his labour-power by the capitalist who bought it.
On the other hand, the labourer turns the money paid to him for his labour-power, into means of subsistence: this is his individual consumption.
The labourer’s productive consumption, and his individual consumption, are therefore totally distinct.
In the former, he acts as the motive power of capital, and belongs to the capitalist.
In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his necessary vital functions outside the process of production.
The result of the one is, that the capitalist lives; of the other, that the labourer lives.
When treating of the working day, we saw that the labourer is often compelled to make his individual consumption a mere incident of production.
In such a case, he supplies himself with necessaries in order to maintain his labour-power, just as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine and oil to the wheel.
His means of consumption, in that case, are the mere means of consumption required by a means of production; his individual consumption is directly productive consumption.
This, however, appears to be an abuse not essentially appertaining to capitalist production.
By converting part of his capital into labour-power, the capitalist augments the value of his entire capital.
He profits, not only by what he receives from, but by what he gives to, the labourer.
The capital given in exchange for labour-power is converted into necessaries, by the consumption of which the muscles, nerves, bones, and brains of existing labourers are reproduced, and new labourers are begotten.
It is the production and reproduction of that means of production so indispensable to the capitalist: the labourer himself.
The fact that the labourer consumes his means of subsistence for his own purposes, and not to please the capitalist, has no bearing on the matter.
The consumption of food by a beast of burden is none the less a necessary factor in the process of production, because the beast enjoys what it eats.
The maintenance and reproduction of the working class is, and must ever be, a necessary condition to the reproduction of capital.
But the capitalist may safely leave its fulfilment to the labourer’s instincts of self-preservation and of propagation.
From a social point of view, therefore, the working class, even when not directly engaged in the labour process, is just as much an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments of labour.
Even its individual consumption is, within certain limits, a mere factor in the process of production.
The Roman slave was held by fetters: the wage labourer is bound to his owner by invisible threads.
The appearance of independence is kept up by means of a constant change of employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract.
In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over the free labourer.
For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of mechanics employed in machine making was, in England, forbidden, under grievous pains and penalties.
The reproduction of the working class carries with it the accumulation of skill, that is handed down from one generation to another.
In consequence of the civil war in the United States and of the accompanying cotton famine, the majority of the cotton operatives in Lancashire were, as is well known, thrown out of work.
This letter was rightly called in the House of Commons, the manufacturers’ manifesto.
We cull here a few characteristic passages, in which the proprietary rights of capital over labour-power are unblushingly asserted.
But if the public funds are to be devoted to assist emigration, he bas a right to be heard, and perhaps to protest.
The question I would put then is this — Is the trade worth retaining?
Is it worth while to keep the machinery (he means the living labour machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly to think of parting with that?
I allow that the workers are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the masters; but they are the strength of both; they are the mental and trained power which cannot be.
We are told the workers wish it” (emigration).
The living machinery, on the contrary gets better the longer it lasts, and in proportion as the skill, handed from one generation to another, accumulates.
Potter means the human machinery, for he goes on to protest that he does not mean to use them as an absolute property.
We must confess that we do not think it ‘worth while,’ or even possible, to keep the human machinery in order-that is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is wanted.
Human machinery will rust under inaction, oil and rub it as you may.
Moreover, the human machinery will, as we have just seen, get the steam up of its own accord, and burst or run amuck in our great towns.
Potter says, require some time to reproduce the workers, but, having machinists and capitalists at hand, we could always find thrifty, hard, industrious men wherewith to improvise more master manufacturers than we can ever want.
Potter talks of the trade reviving ‘in one, two, or three years,’ and he asks us not ‘to encourage or allow (!
The Times’ article was only a jeu d’esprit.
The “great public opinion” was, in fact, of Mr.
Potter’s opinion, that the factory operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory.
They were locked up in that “moral workhouse,” the cotton districts, and they form, as before, “the strength” of the cotton manufacturers of Lancashire.
Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the separation between labour-power and the means of labour.
It thereby reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploiting the labourer.
It incessantly forces him to sell his labour-power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase labour-power in order that he may enrich himself.
It is no longer a mere accident, that capitalist and labourer confront each other in the market as buyer and seller.
In reality, the labourer belongs to capital before he has sold himself to capital.
His economic bondage is both brought about and concealed by the periodic sale of himself, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the market-price of labour-power.
Hitherto we have investigated how surplus-value emanates from capital; we have now to see how capital arises from surplus-value.
Employing surplus-value as capital, reconverting it into capital, is called accumulation of capital.
First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of the individual capitalist.
We can neither see nor smell in this sum of money a trace of surplus-value.
When we know that a given value is surplus-value, we know how its owner came by it; but that does not alter the nature either of value or of money.
The capital value was originally advanced in the money form.
The surplus-value on the contrary is, originally, the value of a definite portion of the gross product.
If this gross product be sold, converted into money, the capital value regains its original form.
From this moment the capital value and the surplus-value are both of them sums of money, and their reconversion into capital takes place in precisely the same way.
But in order to be able to buy those commodities, he must find them ready in the market.
His own yarns circulate, only because he brings his annual product to market, as all other capitalists likewise do with their commodities.
But these commodities, before coming to market, were part of the general annual product, part of the total mass of objects of every kind, into which the sum of the individual capitals, i.
Hence the use that can be made of the total annual product, depends entirely upon its own composition, but in no way upon circulation.
The annual production must in the first place furnish all those objects (use values) from which the material components of capital, used up in the course of the year, have to be replaced.
Deducting these there remains the net or surplus-product, in which the surplus-value lies.
Only of things destined to satisfy the wants and desires of the capitalist class, things which, consequently, enter into the consumption fund of the capitalists?
Were that the case, the cup of surplus-value would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple reproduction would ever take place.
To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the surplus-product into capital.
But we cannot, except by a miracle, convert into capital anything but such articles as can be employed in the labour process (i.
Consequently, a part of the annual surplus-labour must have been applied to the production of additional means of production and subsistence, over and above the quantity of these things required to replace the capital advanced.
In one word, surplus-value is convertible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the material elements of new capital.
Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning as capital, the capitalist class requires additional labour.
If the exploitation of the labourers already employed do not increase, either extensively or intensively, then additional labour-power must be found.
For this the mechanism of capitalist production provides beforehand, by converting the working class into a class dependent on wages, a class whose ordinary wages suffice, not only for its maintenance, but for its increase.
From a concrete point of view, accumulation resolves itself into the reproduction of capital on a progressively increasing scale.
The circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its form, and, to use Sismondi’s expression, changes into a spiral.
It is the old story: Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so on.
We here leave out of consideration the portion of the surplus-value consumed by the capitalist.
How did the owner become possessed of it?
“By his own labour and that of his forefathers,” answer unanimously the spokesmen of Political Economy.
And, in fact, their supposition appears the only one consonant with the laws of the production of commodities.
There is not one single atom of its value that does not owe its existence to unpaid labour.
When viewed as a transaction between the capitalist class and the working class, it makes no difference that additional labourers are employed by means of the unpaid labour of the previously employed labourers.
The capitalist may even convert the additional capital into a machine that throws the producers of that capital out of work, and that replaces them by a few children.
In every case the working class creates by the surplus-labour of one year the capital destined to employ additional labour in the following year.
And this is what is called: creating capital out of capital.
The ownership of past unpaid labour is thenceforth the sole condition for the appropriation of living unpaid labour on a constantly increasing scale.
The more the capitalist has accumulated, the more is he able to accumulate.
In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional capital, No.
The exchange of equivalents, the original operation with which we started, has now become turned round in such a way that there is only an apparent exchange.
The relation of exchange subsisting between capitalist and labourer becomes a mere semblance appertaining to the process of circulation, a mere form, foreign to the real nature of the transaction, and only mystifying it.
At first the rights of property seemed to us to be based on a man’s own labour.
The separation of property from labour has become the necessary consequence of a law that apparently originated in their identity.
Let us make this clear once more by briefly reviewing the consecutive phases of motion whose culminating point is capitalist accumulation.
We saw, in the first place, that the original conversion of a sum of values into capital was achieved in complete accordance with the laws of exchange.
One party to the contract sells his labour-power, the other buys it.
The former receives the value of his commodity, whose use value — labour — is thereby alienated to the buyer.
Means of production which already belong to the latter are then transformed by him, with the aid of labour equally belonging to him, into a new product which is likewise lawfully his.
The value of this product includes: first, the value of the used-up means of production.
The value of the new product further includes: the equivalent of the value of the labour-power together with a surplus-value.
This is so because the value of the labour-power — sold for a definite length of time, say a day, a week, etc.
But the worker has received payment for the exchange-value of his labour-power and by so doing has alienated its use value — this being the case in every sale and purchase.
The fact that this particular commodity, labour-power, possesses the peculiar use value of supplying labour, and therefore of creating value, cannot affect the general law of commodity production.
The law of exchange requires equality only between the exchange-values of the commodities given in exchange for one another.
From the very outset it presupposes even a difference between their use values and it has nothing whatever to do with their consumption, which only begins after the deal is closed and executed.
Thus the original conversion of money into capital is achieved in the most exact accordance with the economic laws of commodity production and with the right of property derived from them.
Simple reproduction is only the periodical repetition of this first operation; each time money is converted afresh into capital.
Thus the law is not broken; on the contrary, it is merely enabled to operate continuously.
“Several successive acts of exchange have only made the last represent the first” (Sismondi, “Nouveaux Principes, etc.
And yet we have seen that simple reproduction suffices to stamp this first operation, in so far as it is conceived as an isolated process, with a totally changed character.
It is indeed notorious that the sphere of labour is not the only one in which primogeniture works miracles.
Nor does it matter if simple reproduction is replaced by reproduction on an extended scale, by accumulation.
In the former case the capitalist squanders the whole surplus-value in dissipation, in the latter he demonstrates his bourgeois virtue by consuming only a portion of it and converting the rest into money.
The surplus-value is his property; it has never belonged to anyone else.
If he advances it for the purposes of production, the advances made come from his own funds, exactly as on the day when he first entered the market.
The fact that on this occasion the funds are derived from the unpaid labour of his workers makes absolutely no difference.
What B claims, and has a right to claim, is that the capitalist should pay him the value of his labour-power.
But in so doing we should be applying standards entirely foreign to commodity production.
Only buyer and seller, mutually independent, face each other in commodity production.
The relations between them cease on the day when the term stipulated in the contract they concluded expires.
And since sales and purchases are negotiated solely between particular individuals, it is not admissible to seek here for relations between whole social classes.
However long a series of periodical reproductions and preceding accumulations the capital functioning today may have passed through, it always preserves its original virginity.
This result becomes inevitable from the moment there is a free sale, by the labourer himself, of labour-power as a commodity.
Only when and where wage labour is its basis does commodity production impose itself upon society as a whole; but only then and there also does it unfold all its hidden potentialities.
To say that the supervention of wage labour adulterates commodity production is to say that commodity production must not develop if it is to remain unadulterated.
To the extent that commodity production, in accordance with its own inherent laws, develops further, into capitalist production, the property laws of commodity production change into the laws of capitalist appropriation.
We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction, all capital, whatever its original source, becomes converted into accumulated capital, capitalised surplus-value.
But in the flood of production all the capital originally advanced becomes a vanishing quantity (magnitudo evanescens, in the mathematical sense), compared with the directly accumulated capital, i.
Hence, Political Economy describes capital in general as “accumulated wealth” (converted surplus-value or revenue), “that is employed over again in the production of surplus-value,” and the capitalist as “the owner of surplus-value.
Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconversion of surplus-value into capital, we must brush on one side an ambiguity introduced by the classical economists.
Instead of converting surplus-value into capital, he, on the contrary, by the purchase of those commodities and that labour, consumes or expends it as revenue.
Exclusion of money from circulation would also exclude absolutely its self-expansion as capital, while accumulation of a hoard in the shape of commodities would be sheer tomfoolery.
The accumulation of commodities in great masses is the result either of over-production or of a stoppage of circulation.
Classical economy is therefore quite right, when it maintains that the consumption of surplus-products by productive, instead of by unproductive labourers, is a characteristic feature of the process of accumulation.
But at this point the mistakes also begin.
When we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean is, that the portion of revenue, so said to be added to capital, is consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers.
There can be no greater error than in supposing that capital is increased by non-consumption.
There can be no greater error than that which Ricardo and all subsequent economists repeat after A.
“the part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added to capital, is consumed by productive labourers.
According to this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes variable capital.
So far from this being the case, the surplus-value, like the original capital, divides itself into constant capital and variable capital, into means of production and labour-power.
Labour-power is the form under which variable capital exists during the process of production.
In this process the labour-power is itself consumed by the capitalist while the means of production are consumed by the labour-power in the exercise of its function, labour.
At the same time, the money paid for the purchase of the labour-power, is converted into necessaries, that are consumed, not by “productive labour,” but by the “productive labourer.
One portion he lays out in buying weavers, the other in woollen yarn, machinery, &c.
It is evident that the whole gist of this argument lies in the words “and so on,” which send us from pillar to post.
In truth, Adam Smith breaks his investigation off, just where its difficulties begin.
The annual process of reproduction is easily understood, so long as we keep in view merely the sum total of the year’s production.
But every single component of this product must be brought into the market as a commodity, and there the difficulty begins.
I shall give the analysis of the real bearings of the facts.
For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, acting in the interests of the capitalist class, has not failed to exploit the doctrine of Adam Smith, viz.
In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus-value (or the surplus-product) solely as a fund for supplying the individual consumption of the capitalist.
In this chapter we have, so far, treated it solely as a fund for accumulation.
It is, however, neither the one nor the other, but is both together.
One portion is consumed by the capitalist as revenue, the other is employed as capital, is accumulated.
Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of these parts, the smaller is the other.
Caeteris paribus, the ratio of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation.
But it is by the owner of the surplus-value, by the capitalist alone, that the division is made.
That part of the tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is said to be saved by him, because he does not eat it, i.
Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historical value, and no right to that historical existence, which, to use an expression of the witty Lichnowsky, “hasn’t got no date.
But, so far as he is personified capital, it is not values in use and the enjoyment of them, but exchange-value and its augmentation, that spur him into action.
Only as personified capital is the capitalist respectable.
As such, he shares with the miser the passion for wealth as wealth.
But that which in the miser is a mere idiosyncrasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels.
It compels him to keep constantly extending his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, except by means of progressive accumulation.
To accumulate, is to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the mass of human beings exploited by him, and thus to extend both the direct and the indirect sway of the capitalist.
As capitalist production, accumulation, and wealth, become developed, the capitalist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital.
He has a fellow-feeling for his own Adam, and his education gradually enables him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere prejudice of the old-fashioned miser.
While the capitalist of the classical type brands individual consumption as a sin against his function, and as “abstinence” from accumulating, the modernised capitalist is capable of looking upon accumulation as “abstinence” from pleasure.
“Two souls, alas, do dwell with in his breast; The one is ever parting from the other.
At the historical dawn of capitalist production, — and every capitalist upstart has personally to go through this historical stage — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling passions.
But the progress of capitalist production not only creates a world of delights; it lays open, in speculation and the credit system, a thousand sources of sudden enrichment.
When a certain stage of development has been reached, a conventional degree of prodigality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and consequently a source of credit, becomes a business necessity to the “unfortunate” capitalist.
But along with this growth, there is at the same time developed in his breast, a Faustian conflict between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for enjoyment.
“The trade of Manchester may be divided into four periods.
First, when manufacturers were obliged to work hard for their livelihood.
They enriched themselves chiefly by robbing the parents, whose children were bound as apprentices to them; the parents paid a high premium, while the apprentices were starved.
On the other hand, the average profits were low, and to accumulate, extreme parsimony was requisite.
They lived like misers and were far from consuming even the interest on their capital.
However, about that time, or a little later, the traders had got money beforehand, and began to build modern brick houses, instead of those of wood and plaster.
Even in the early part of the 18th century, a Manchester manufacturer, who placed a pint of foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks and headshakings of all his neighbours.
Before the rise of machinery, a manufacturer’s evening expenditure at the public house where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass of punch, and a penny for a screw of tobacco.
It was not till 1758, and this marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged in business was seen with an equipage of his own.
Aikin say if he could rise from his grave and see the Manchester of today?
Accumulation for accumulation’s sake, production for production’s sake: by this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a single instant deceive itself over the birth-throes of wealth.
But what avails lamentation in the face of historical necessity?
Political Economy takes the historical function of the capitalist in bitter earnest.
“to keep separate the passion for expenditure and the passion for accumulation.
The capitalists having long been good livers and men of the world, uttered loud cries.
What, exclaimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple of Ricardo, Mr.
“production will, by such a process, be far more curbed in than spurred on.
Nor is it quite fair thus to maintain in idleness a number of persons, only to pinch others, who are likely, from their characters, if you can force them to work, to work with success.
Unfair as he finds it to spur on the industrial capitalist, by depriving his bread of its butter, yet he thinks it necessary to reduce the labourer’s wages to a minimum "to keep him industrious.
Shortly afterwards, the town proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, and the country proletariat in England began to set fire to farm-yards and corn-stacks.
On this side of the Channel Owenism began to spread; on the other side, St.
Senior discovered at Manchester, that the profit (including interest) of capital is the product of the last hour of the twelve, he had announced to the world another discovery.
“I substitute,” he proudly says, “for the word capital, considered as an instrument of production, the word abstinence.
An unparalleled sample this, of the discoveries of vulgar economy!
It substitutes for an economic category, a sycophantic phrase — voilà tout.
“When the savage,” says Senior, “makes bows, he exercises an industry, but he does not practise abstinence.
This explains how and why, in the earlier states of society, the implements of labour were fabricated without abstinence on the part of the capitalist.
Namely, from those who ply the industry of appropriating the fruits of others’ industry.
All the conditions for carrying on the labour process are suddenly converted into so many acts of abstinence on the part of the capitalist.
If the corn is not all eaten, but part of it also sown — abstinence of the capitalist.
If the wine gets time to mature — abstinence of the capitalist.
The capitalist robs his own self, whenever he “lends (!
How the capitalists as a class are to perform that feat, is a secret that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinately refused to divulge.
Enough, that the world still jogs on, solely through the self-chastisement of this modern penitent of Vishnu, the capitalist.
Not only accumulation, but the simple “conservation of a capital requires a constant effort to resist the temptation of consuming it.
In economic forms of society of the most different kinds, there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but, in varying degrees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale.
By degrees more is produced and more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production.
Richard Jones, who died a few years ago, and was the successor of Malthus in the chair of Political Economy at Haileybury College, discusses this point well in the light of two important facts.
Here, production and reproduction on a progressively increasing scale, go on their way without any intervention from that queer saint, that knight of the woeful countenance, the capitalist “abstainer.
The proportion in which surplus-value breaks up into capital and revenue being given, the magnitude of the capital accumulated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the surplus-value.
Hence all the circumstances that determine the mass of surplus-value operate to determine the magnitude of the accumulation.
We sum them up once again, but only in so far as they afford new points of view in regard to accumulation.
It will be remembered that the rate of surplus-value depends, in the first place, on the degree of exploitation of labour-power.
Political Economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally identifies the acceleration of accumulation due to increased productiveness of labour, with its acceleration due to increased exploitation of the labourer.
In the chapters on the production of surplus-value it was constantly presupposed that wages are at least equal to the value of labour-power.
Forcible reduction of wages below this value plays, however, in practice too important a part, for us not to pause upon it for a moment.
It, in fact, transforms, within certain limits, the labourer’s necessary consumption fund into a fund for the accumulation of capital.
“Wages,” says John Stuart Mill, “have no productive power; they are the price of a productive power.
Wages do not contribute, along with labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of tools contributes along with the tools themselves.
If labour could be had without purchase, wages might be dispensed with.
But if the labourers could live on air they could not be bought at any price.
The zero of their cost is therefore a limit in a mathematical sense, always beyond reach, although we can always approximate more and more nearly to it.
The constant tendency of capital is to force the cost of labour back towards this zero.
When it is considered what luxuries the manufacturing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, sugar, foreign fruit, strong beer, printed linens, snuff, tobacco, &C.
“Labour is one-third cheaper in France than in England; for their poor work hard, and fare hard, as to their food and clothing.
Their chief diet is bread, fruit, herbs, roots, and dried fish; for they very seldom eat flesh; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread.
These things are very difficult to be brought about; but they are not impracticable, since they have been effected both in France and in Holland.
Twenty years later, an American humbug, the baronised Yankee, Benjamin Thompson (alias Count Rumford) followed the same line of philanthropy to the great satisfaction of God and man.
His “Essays” are a cookery book with receipts of all kinds for replacing by some succedaneum the ordinary dear food of the labourer.
With the advance of capitalistic production, the adulteration of food rendered Thompson’s ideal superfluous.
“The squires of Norfolk had dined, says Mr.
There they decide that ‘income (weekly) should be 3s.
Before the Committee of Inquiry of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain A.
“Has any proportion of the value of daily labour been made up to the labourers out of the poors’ rate?
The gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the maintenance of every person in the family for the week; and the 3d.
This practice goes through all the western part of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the country.
If the capitalist wishes to raise this sum by one half, he can employ 50 more workers; but then he must also advance more capital, not merely for wages, but for instruments of labour.
These would then simply be more rapidly consumed.
Thus additional labour, begotten of the greater tension of labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus-value (i.
The subject of labour is in this case not a product of previous labour, but is furnished by Nature gratis, as in the case of metals, minerals, coal, stone, &c.
In these cases the constant capital consists almost exclusively of instruments of labour, which can very well absorb an increased quantity of labour (day and night shifts of labourers, e.
All other things being equal, the mass and value of the product will rise in direct proportion to the labour expended.
As on the first day of production, the original produce-formers, now turned into the creators of the material elements of capital — man and Nature — still work together.
Thanks to the elasticity of labour-power, the domain of accumulation has extended without any previous enlargement of constant capital.
In agriculture the land under cultivation cannot be increased without the advance of more seed and manure.
But this advance once made, the purely mechanical working of the soil itself produces a marvellous effect on the amount of the product.
A greater quantity of labour, done by the same number of labourers as before, thus increases the fertility, without requiring any new advance in the instruments of labour.
It is once again the direct action of man on Nature which becomes an immediate source of greater accumulation, without the intervention of any new capital.
Finally, in what is called manufacturing industry, every additional expenditure of labour presupposes a corresponding additional expenditure of raw materials, but not necessarily of instruments of labour.
Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is the degree of productivity of social labour.
With the productive power of labour increases the mass of the products, in which a certain value, and, therefore, a surplus-value of a given magnitude, is embodied.
The rate of surplus-value remaining the same or even falling, so long as it only falls more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, the mass of the surplus-product increases.
The division of this product into revenue and additional capital remaining the same, the consumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase without any decrease in the fund of accumulation.
But hand-in-hand with the increasing productivity of labour, goes, as we have seen, the cheapening of the labourer, therefore a higher rate of surplus-value, even when the real wages are rising.
The latter never rise proportionally to the productive power of labour.
The same value in variable capital therefore sets in movement more labour-power, and, therefore, more labour.
The same value in constant capital is embodied in more means of production, i.
The value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same or even diminishing, accelerated accumulation still takes place.
Not only does the scale of reproduction materially extend, but the production of surplus-value increases more rapidly than the value of the additional capital.
The development of the productive power of labour reacts also on the original capital already engaged in the process of production.
A part of the functioning constant capital consists of instruments of labour, such as machinery, &c.
But every year a part of these instruments of labour perishes or reaches the limit of its productive function.
It reaches, therefore, in that year, the time for its periodical reproduction, for its replacement by new ones of the same kind.
The old capital is reproduced in a more productive form, apart from the constant detail improvements in the instruments of labour already in use.
The other part of the constant capital, raw material and auxiliary substances, is constantly reproduced in less than a year; those produced by agriculture, for the most part annually.
Every introduction of improved methods, therefore, works almost simultaneously on the new capital and on that already in action.
Every advance in Chemistry not only multiplies the number of useful materials and the useful applications of those already known, thus extending with the growth of capital its sphere of investment.
Like the increased exploitation of natural wealth by the mere increase in the tension of labour-power, science and technology give capital a power of expansion independent of the given magnitude of the capital actually functioning.
They react at the same time on that part of the original capital which has entered upon its stage of renewal.
This, in passing into its new shape, incorporates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was being used up.
Of course, this development of productive power is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning capital.
So far as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt in competition, the burden falls on the labourer, in the increased exploitation of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification.
Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of production consumed by it.
On the other hand, the value and mass of the means of production set in motion by a given quantity of labour increase as the labour becomes more productive.
In the same time as the Chinaman spins one pound of cotton, the Englishman spins several hundreds of pounds.
A sum, many hundred times as great, of old values swells the value of his product, in which those re-appear in a new, useful form, and can thus function anew as capital.
At the same time, it caused and stimulated increased reproduction of wool.
It is the natural property of living labour, to transmit old value, whilst it creates new.
With the increase of capital, the difference between the capital employed and the capital consumed increases.
In the same proportion as these instruments of labour serve as product-formers without adding value to the product, i.
This gratuitous service of past labour, when seized and filled with a soul by living labour, increases with the advancing stages of accumulation.
Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.
The more, therefore, capital increases by means of successive accumulations, the more does the sum of the value increase that is divided into consumption fund and accumulation fund.
The capitalist can, therefore, live a more jolly life, and at the same time show more “abstinence.
In this inquiry we have neglected all effects of the process of circulation, effects which may produce very different degrees of efficiency in the same mass of capital.
Classical economy always loved to conceive social capital as a fixed magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency.
But this prejudice was first established as a dogma by the arch-Philistine, Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic, leather-tongued oracle of the ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century.
Bentham is among philosophers what Martin Tupper is among poets.
Both could only have been manufactured in England.
In the light of his dogma the commonest phenomena of the process of production, as, e.
The dogma was used by Bentham himself, as well as by Malthus, James Mill, MacCulloch, etc.
On the other hand, only in favourable and exceptional cases, has he the power to enlarge the so-called labour fund at the expense of the “revenue” of the wealthy.
What silly tautology results from the attempt to represent the capitalistic limits of the labour fund as its natural and social limits may be seen, e.
“The circulating capital of a country,” he says, “is its wage-fund.
Hence, if we desire to calculate the average money wages received by each labourer, we have simply to divide the amount of this capital by the number of the labouring population.
Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by the number of labourers to find out again how much may come to each on the average.
Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large portion of the wealth which is annually saved in this country, is invested in our own industry.
The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, embezzled, because abstracted without return of an equivalent, from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in England, but in foreign countries.
But with the additional capital thus exported, a part of the “labour fund” invented by God and Bentham is also exported.
In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of capital on the lot of the labouring class.
The most important factor in this inquiry is the composition of capital and the changes it undergoes in the course of the process of accumulation.
The composition of capital is to be understood in a two-fold sense.
On the side of material, as it functions in the process of production, all capital is divided into means of production and living labour power.
This latter composition is determined by the relation between the mass of the means of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour necessary for their employment on the other.
I call the former the value-composition, the latter the technical composition of capital.
Between the two there is a strict correlation.
To express this, I call the value composition of capital, in so far as it is determined by its technical composition and mirrors the changes of the latter, the organic composition of capital.
Wherever I refer to the composition of capital, without further qualification, its organic composition is always understood.
The many individual capitals invested in a particular branch of production have, one with another, more or less different compositions.
The average of their individual compositions gives us the composition of the total capital in this branch of production.
Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent or of the part invested in labour power.
A part of the surplus-value turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed into variable capital, or additional labour fund.
If we suppose that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the composition of capital also remains constant (i.
This must, indeed, ultimately be the case if the conditions supposed above continue.
A lamentation on this score was heard in England during the whole of the fifteenth, and the first half of the eighteenth centuries.
The more or less favourable circumstances in which the wage working class supports and multiplies itself, in no way alter the fundamental character of capitalist production.
As simple reproduction constantly reproduces the capital relation itself, i.
Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat.
Classical economy grasped this fact so thoroughly that Adam Smith, Ricardo, &c.
“For if one had a hundred thousand acres of land and as many pounds in money, and as many cattle, without a labourer, what would the rich man be, but a labourer?
“It would be easier, where property is well secured, to live without money than without poor; for who would do the work?
As they [the poor] ought to be kept from starving, so they should receive nothing worth saving.
What Mandeville, an honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the mechanism of the process of accumulation itself increases, along with the capital, the mass of “labouring poor,” i.
In reference to this relation of dependence, Sir F.
“the natural produce of our soil is certainly not fully adequate to our subsistence; we can neither be clothed, lodged nor fed but in consequence of some previous labour.
Eden, it may be remarked in passing, is the only disciple of Adam Smith during the eighteenth century that produced any work of importance.
Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers, their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form endurable or, as Eden says: “easy and liberal.
But just as little as better clothing, food, and treatment, and a larger peculium, do away with the exploitation of the slave, so little do they set aside that of the wage worker.
In the controversies on this subject the chief fact has generally been overlooked, viz.
Labour power is sold today, not with a view of satisfying, by its service or by its product, the personal needs of the buyer.
Production of surplus-value is the absolute law of this mode of production.
Labour power is only saleable so far as it preserves the means of production in their capacity of capital, reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour a source of additional capital.
The conditions of its sale, whether more or less favourable to the labourer, include therefore the necessity of its constant re-selling, and the constantly extended reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital.
Wages, as we have seen, by their very nature, always imply the performance of a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the part of the labourer.
Altogether, irrespective of the case of a rise of wages with a falling price of labour, &c.
This diminution can never reach the point at which it would threaten the system itself.
Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise does not interfere with the progress of accumulation.
A great stock, though with small profits, generally increases faster than a small stock with great profits.
The rate of accumulation lessens; but with its lessening, the primary cause of that lessening vanishes, i.
The mechanism of the process of capitalist production removes the very obstacles that it temporarily creates.
It is these absolute movements of the accumulation of capital which are reflected as relative movements of the mass of exploitable labour power, and therefore seem produced by the latter’s own independent movement.
To put it mathematically: the rate of accumulation is the independent, not the dependent, variable; the rate of wages, the dependent, not the independent, variable.
The so-called currency school concludes from this that with high prices too much, with low prices too little money is in circulation.
Their ignorance and complete misunderstanding of facts are worthily paralleled by the economists, who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by saying that there are now too few, now too many wage labourers.
The rise of wages therefore is confined within limits that not only leave intact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure its reproduction on a progressive scale.
As, in religion, man is governed by the products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the products of his own hand.
Apart from natural conditions, such as fertility of the soil, &c.
The mass of the means of production which he thus transforms, increases with the productiveness of his labour.
But those means of production play a double part.
The increase of some is a consequence, that of the others a condition of the increasing productivity of labour.
That is the consequence of the increasing productivity of labour.
On the other hand, the mass of machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain-pipes, &c.
So also is it with the means of production concentrated in buildings, furnaces, means of transport, &c.
But whether condition or consequence, the growing extent of the means of production, as compared with the labour power incorporated with them, is an expression of the growing productiveness of labour.
This diminution in the variable part of capital as compared with the constant, or the altered value-composition of the capital, however, only shows approximately the change in the composition of its material constituents.
The reason is simply that, with the increasing productivity of labour, not only does the mass of the means of production consumed by it increase, but their value compared with their mass diminishes.
Their value therefore rises absolutely, but not in proportion to their mass.
The former difference increases with the latter, but in a smaller degree.
But, if the progress of accumulation lessens the relative magnitude of the variable part of capital, it by no means, in doing this, excludes the possibility of a rise in its absolute magnitude.
Suppose that a capital-value at first is divided into 50 per cent.
But where as formerly an increase of capital by 20 per cent.
The basis of the production of commodities can admit of production on a large scale in the capitalistic form alone.
A certain accumulation of capital, in the hands of individual producers of commodities, forms therefore the necessary preliminary of the specifically capitalistic mode of production.
We had, therefore, to assume that this occurs during the transition from handicraft to capitalistic industry.
It may be called primitive accumulation, because it is the historic basis, instead of the historic result of specifically capitalist production.
How it itself originates, we need not here inquire as yet.
It is enough that it forms the starting point.
They are, therefore, at the same time methods of the production of capital by capital, or methods of its accelerated accumulation.
The continual re-transformation of surplus-value into capital now appears in the shape of the increasing magnitude of the capital that enters into the process of production.
This in turn is the basis of an extended scale of production, of the methods for raising the productive power of labour that accompany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value.
If, therefore, a certain degree of accumulation of capital appears as a condition of the specifically capitalist mode of production, the latter causes conversely an accelerated accumulation of capital.
With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the specifically capitalistic mode of production develops, and with the capitalist mode of production the accumulation of capital.
Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration of means of production, with a corresponding command over a larger or smaller labour-army.
Every accumulation becomes the means of new accumulation.
The growth of social capital is effected by the growth of many individual capitals.
All other circumstances remaining the same, individual capitals, and with them the concentration of the means of production, increase in such proportion as they form aliquot parts of the total social capital.
At the same time portions of the original capitals disengage themselves and function as new independent capitals.
Besides other causes, the division of property, within capitalist families, plays a great part in this.
With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the number of capitalists grows to a greater or less extent.
Two points characterise this kind of concentration which grows directly out of, or rather is identical with, accumulation.
First: The increasing concentration of the social means of production in the hands of individual capitalists is, other things remaining equal, limited by the degree of increase of social wealth.
Second: The part of social capital domiciled in each particular sphere of production is divided among many capitalists who face one another as independent commodity-producers competing with each other.
Accumulation and the concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered over many points, but the increase of each functioning capital is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old capitals.
Accumulation, therefore, presents itself on the one hand as increasing concentration of the means of production, and of the command over labour; on the other, as repulsion of many individual capitals one from another.
This splitting-up of the total social capital into many individual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from another, is counteracted by their attraction.
This last does not mean that simple concentration of the means of production and of the command over labour, which is identical with accumulation.
It is concentration of capitals already formed, destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capitalist, transformation of many small into few large capitals.
Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single hand, because it has in another place been lost by many.
This is centralisation proper, as distinct from accumulation and concentration.
The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attraction of capital by capital, cannot be developed here.
A brief hint at a few facts must suffice.
The battle of competition is fought by cheapening of commodities.
The cheapness of commodities demands, caeteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and this again on the scale of production.
The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which Modern Industry has only sporadically or incompletely got hold of.
Here competition rages in direct proportion to the number, and in inverse proportion to the magnitudes, of the antagonistic capitals.
It always ends in the ruin of many small capitalists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their conquerors, partly vanish.
Commensurately with the development of capitalist production and accumulation there develop the two most powerful levers of centralisation — competition and credit.
At the same time the progress of accumulation increases the material amenable to centralisation, i.
Today, therefore, the force of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before.
And this is the specific difference between centralisation and concentration, the latter being only another name for reproduction on an extended scale.
Centralisation may result from a mere change in the distribution of capitals already existing, from a simple alteration in the quantitative grouping of the component parts of social capital.
Here capital can grow into powerful masses in a single hand because there it has been withdrawn from many individual hands.
In any given branch of industry centralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual capitals invested in it were fused into a single capital.
In a given society the limit would be reached only when the entire social capital was united in the hands of either a single capitalist or a single capitalist company.
Centralisation completes the work of accumulation by enabling industrial capitalists to extend the scale of their operations.
The world would still be without railways if it had had to wait until accumulation had got a few individual capitals far enough to be adequate for the construction of a railway.
Centralisation, on the contrary, accomplished this in the twinkling of an eye, by means of joint-stock companies.
The masses of capital fused together overnight by centralisation reproduce and multiply as the others do, only more rapidly, thereby becoming new and powerful levers in social accumulation.
Therefore, when we speak of the progress of social accumulation we tacitly include — today — the effects of centralisation.
The additional capitals formed in the normal course of accumulation (see Chapter XXIV, Section 1) serve particularly as vehicles for the exploitation of new inventions and discoveries, and industrial improvements in general.
On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer labourers in proportion to its magnitude.
On the other hand, the old capital periodically reproduced with change of composition, repels more and more of the labourers formerly employed by it.
With the advance of accumulation, therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capital changes.
It falls relatively to the magnitude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as this magnitude increases.
With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it, also does increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion.
The intermediate pauses are shortened, in which accumulation works as simple extension of production, on a given technical basis.
In its turn, this increasing accumulation and centralisation becomes a source of new changes in the composition of capital, of a more accelerated diminution of its variable, as compared with its constant constituent.
But in fact, it is capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces in the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a relatively redundant population of labourers, i.
It forms a disposable industrial reserve army, that belongs to capital quite as absolutely as if the latter had bred it at its own cost.
Independently of the limits of the actual increase of population, it creates, for the changing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human material always ready for exploitation.
In all such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great masses of men suddenly on the decisive points without injury to the scale of production in other spheres.
In their turn, the varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus population, and become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduction.
This peculiar course of modern industry, which occurs in no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the childhood of capitalist production.
The composition of capital changed but very slowly.
With its accumulation, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding growth in the demand for labour.
This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly “sets free” a part of the labourers; by methods which lessen the number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased production.
The whole form of the movement of modern industry depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of a part of the labouring population into unemployed or half-employed hands.
As the heavenly bodies, once thrown into a certain definite motion, always repeat this, so is it with social production as soon as it is once thrown into this movement of alternate expansion and contraction.
Effects, in their turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole process, which always reproduces its own conditions, take on the form of periodicity.
When this periodicity is once consolidated, even Political Economy then sees that the production of a relative surplus population — i.
That, at the first returning demand for labour, there would be a deficiency.
However rapid reproduction may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a generation to replace the loss of adult labour.
Now, the profits of our manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making use of the prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus compensating themselves for the interval during which it is slack.
This power is secured to them only by the command of machinery and of manual labour.
Even Malthus recognises overpopulation as a necessity of modern industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it by the absolute over-growth of the labouring population, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary.
“We manufacturers do what we can for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on which you must subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your numbers to the means of subsistence.
Capitalist production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labour power which the natural increase of population yields.
It requires for its free play an industrial reserve army independent of these natural limits.
Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or diminution of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed.
The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain the same, or even fall, while the variable capital increases.
Increase of variable capital, in this case, becomes an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed.
It is the absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of labourers, if the cost is about the same.
In the latter case, the outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the mass of labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller.
The more extended the scale of production, the stronger this motive.
Its force increases with the accumulation of capital.
How important is this element in the formation of the relative surplus population, is shown by the example of England.
Her technical means for saving labour are colossal.
The great majority of the labourers now “unproductive” would have to be turned into “productive” ones.
Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the periodic changes of the industrial cycle.
Yet this is the dogma of the economists.
According to them, wages rise in consequence of accumulation of capital.
The higher wages stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this goes on until the labour-market becomes too full, and therefore capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient.
Wages fall, and now we have the reverse of the medal.
Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less than the demand, wages rise, and so on.
A beautiful mode of motion this for developed capitalist production!
This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural surplus population caused by the demands of war, the vast extension of railroads, factories, mines, &c.
The lower the wages, the higher is the proportion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them expresses itself.
Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Economist, with reference to these starvation-wages, prattled quite seriously of “a general and substantial advance.
Did they wait until, in consequence of this brilliant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increased and multiplied that their wages must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic economic brain?
They introduced more machinery, and in a moment the labourers were redundant again in a proportion satisfactory even to the farmers.
There was now “more capital” laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive form.
With this the demand for labour fell, not only relatively, but absolutely.
The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate the general movement of wages, or the ratio between the working class — i.
Then, not only does the immigration of labourers into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to their emigration.
Here the political economist thinks he sees the why and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompanying an increase of wages, and of a diminution of wages accompanying an absolute increase of labourers.
The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation and average prosperity, weighs down the active labour-army; during the periods of over-production and paroxysm, it holds its pretensions in check.
Relative surplus population is therefore the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour works.
It confines the field of action of this law within the limits absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation and to the domination of capital.
This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of economic apologetics.
Only now can one fully understand the effrontery of these apologists.
They are now all “set free,” and every new bit of capital looking out for employment can dispose of them.
That is to say, the mechanism of capitalistic production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capital is accompanied by no corresponding rise in the general demand for labour.
And this the apologist calls a compensation for the misery, the sufferings, the possible death of the displaced labourers during the transition period that banishes them into the industrial reserve army!
The demand for labour is not identical with increase of capital, nor supply of labour with increase of the working class.
It is not a case of two independent forces working on one another.
Capital works on both sides at the same time.
The action of the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis completes the despotism of capital.
Every combination of employed and unemployed disturbs the “harmonious” action of this law.
But, on the other hand, as soon as (in the colonies, e.
The relative surplus population exists in every possible form.
Every labourer belongs to it during the time when he is only partially employed or wholly unemployed.
In the centres of modern industry — factories, manufactures, ironworks, mines, &c.
Here the surplus population exists in the floating form.
When this term is once reached, only a very small number continue to find employment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority are regularly discharged.
This majority forms an element of the floating surplus population, growing with the extension of those branches of industry.
Part of them emigrates, following in fact capital that has emigrated.
One consequence is that the female population grows more rapidly than the male, teste England.
It wants larger numbers of youthful labourers, a smaller number of adults.
The consumption of labour power by capital is, besides, so rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has already more or less completely lived himself out.
He falls into the ranks of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down from a higher to a lower step in the scale.
It is precisely among the work-people of modern industry that we meet with the shortest duration of life.
It thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease of life which was more than double the value of that which fell to the lot of the less favoured citizens.
In order to conform to these circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the proletariat must take place under conditions that shall swell their numbers, although the individual elements are used up rapidly.
Hence, rapid renewal of the generations of labourers (this law does not hold for the other classes of the population).
This social need is met by early marriages, a necessary consequence of the conditions in which the labourers of modern industry live, and by the premium that the exploitation of children sets on their production.
Part of the agricultural population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over into an urban or manufacturing proletariat, and on the look-out for circumstances favourable to this transformation.
But the constant flow towards the towns pre-supposes, in the country itself, a constant latent surplus population, the extent of which becomes evident only when its channels of outlet open to exceptional width.
The agricultural labourer is therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one foot already in the swamp of pauperism.
The third category of the relative surplus population, the stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with extremely irregular employment.
Hence it furnishes to capital an inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour power.
Its conditions of life sink below the average normal level of the working class; this makes it at once the broad basis of special branches of capitalist exploitation.
It is characterised by maximum of working-time, and minimum of wages.
We have learnt to know its chief form under the rubric of “domestic industry.
Its extent grows, as with the extent and energy of accumulation, the creation of a surplus population advances.
But it forms at the same time a self-reproducing and self-perpetuating element of the working class, taking a proportionally greater part in the general increase of that class than the other elements.
This law of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even civilised colonists.
It calls to mind the boundless reproduction of animals individually weak and constantly hunted down.
The lowest sediment of the relative surplus population finally dwells in the sphere of pauperism.
Exclusive of vagabonds, criminals, prostitutes, in a word, the “dangerous” classes, this layer of society consists of three categories.
One need only glance superficially at the statistics of English pauperism to find that the quantity of paupers increases with every crisis, and diminishes with every revival of trade.
These are candidates for the industrial reserve army, and are, in times of great prosperity, as 1860, e.
Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour-army and the dead weight of the industrial reserve army.
Its production is included in that of the relative surplus population, its necessity in theirs; along with the surplus population, pauperism forms a condition of capitalist production, and of the capitalist development of wealth.
The same causes which develop the expansive power of capital, develop also the labour power at its disposal.
The relative mass of the industrial reserve army increases therefore with the potential energy of wealth.
But the greater this reserve army in proportion to the active labour army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated surplus population, whose misery is in inverse ratio to its torment of labour.
The more extensive, finally, the lazarus layers of the working class, and the industrial reserve army, the greater is official pauperism.
This is the absolute general law of capitalist accumulation.
Like all other laws it is modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis of which does not concern us here.
The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that preaches to the labourers the accommodation of their number to the requirements of capital.
The mechanism of capitalist production and accumulation constantly effects this adjustment.
The first word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative surplus population, or industrial reserve army.
Its last word is the misery of constantly extending strata of the active army of labour, and the dead weight of pauperism.
But all methods for the production of surplus-value are at the same time methods of accumulation; and every extension of accumulation becomes again a means for the development of those methods.
It follows therefore that in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high or low, must grow worse.
It establishes an accumulation of misery, corresponding with accumulation of capital.
Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.
The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist production as a general natural law of social wealth.
The wealth of a nation corresponds with its population, and its misery corresponds with its wealth.
The poor and idle are a necessary consequence of the rich and active,” &c.
In a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after Ortes, the Church of England parson, Townsend, glorified misery as a necessary condition of wealth.
Everything therefore depends upon making hunger permanent among the working class, and for this, according to Townsend, the principle of population, especially active among the poor, provides.
“It seems to be a law of Nature that the poor should be to a certain degree improvident” [i.
Storch asks himself in what then really consists the progress of this capitalistic civilisation with its misery and its degradation of the masses, as compared with barbarism.
“Thanks to the advance of industry and science,” says Sismondi, “every labourer can produce every day much more than his consumption requires.
But at the same time, whilst his labour produces wealth, that wealth would, were he called on to consume it himself, make him less fit for labour.
The indefinite multiplication of the productive powers of labour can then only have for result the increase of luxury and enjoyment of the idle rich.
“In poor nations the people are comfortable, in rich nations they are generally poor.
No period of modern society is so favourable for the study of capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years.
It is as if this period had found Fortunatus’ purse.
The titanic advance of production — the latter half of the 20 years’ period again far surpassing the former — has been already pointed out sufficiently in Part IV.
Although the absolute increase of the English population in the last half century was very great, the relative increase or rate of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from the census shows.
Let us now, on the other hand, consider the increase of wealth.
Here the movement of profit, rent of land, &c.
The augmentation of the rent of land subject to taxation (including houses, railways, mines, fisheries, &c.
The accumulation of capital was attended at the same time by its concentration and centralisation.
Although no official statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), they were voluntarily given in 10 counties.
The centralisation will, however, be best seen from a short analysis of the Income Tax Schedule D (profits, exclusive of farms, &c.
I note beforehand that incomes from this source pay income tax on everything over £60.
“Rapidly as the population has increased, it has not kept pace with the progress of industry and wealth.
Let us turn now to the direct agents of this industry, or the producers of this wealth, to the working class.
While the rich have been growing richer, the poor have been growing less poor.
At any rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume to say.
If the working class has remained “poor,” only “less poor” in proportion as it produces for the wealthy class “an intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power,” then it has remained relatively just as poor.
If the extremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because the extremes of wealth have.
As to the cheapening of the means of subsistence, the official statistics, e.
“human life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a struggle for existence.
They (the labourers) become almost the slaves of the tradesman, to whom they owe money.
In the chapters on the “working-day” and “machinery,” the reader has seen under what circumstances the British working class created an “intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power” for the propertied classes.
There we were chiefly concerned with the social functioning of the labourer.
But for a full elucidation of the law of accumulation, his condition outside the workshop must also be looked at, his condition as to food and dwelling.
The limits of this book compel us to concern ourselves chiefly with the worst paid part of the industrial proletariat, and with the agricultural labourers, who together form the majority of the working class.
But first, one word on official pauperism, or on that part of the working class which has forfeited its condition of existence (the sale of labour power), and vegetates upon public alms.
From the analysis of the statistics of pauperism, two points are to be taken.
On the one hand, the fluctuation up and down of the number of paupers, reflects the periodic changes of the industrial cycle.
Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same horrors, exactly the same transient canting outcries of “sensational literature.
Smith was charged by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Cheshire.
His calculation was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agreement with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives.
In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the English working class.
Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr.
His inquiry ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the other, over silk-weavers, needlewomen, kid-glovers, stocking-weavers, glove-weavers, and shoemakers.
The latter categories are, with the exception of the stocking-weavers, exclusively town-dwellers.
It was made a rule in the inquiry to select in each category the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the best circumstances.
“in only one of the examined classes of in-door operatives did the average nitrogen supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the estimated standard of bare sufficiency [i.
Among the agricultural labourers, those of England, the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed.
The insufficiency of food among the agricultural labourers, fell, as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for “the man must eat to do his work.
“They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there must be many cases of severe and injurious privation.
The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling work-people, as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr.
The weekly average of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from seven ounces in the needle-women to 24¾ ounces in the stocking-makers.
The majority of those who did not obtain milk were needle-women in London.
The quantity of bread-stuffs consumed weekly varied from 7¾ lbs.
The weekly cost of food per adult, gave the following average figures; silk-weavers 2s.
For the silk-weavers of Macclesfield the average was only 1s.
The worst categories were the needle-women, silk-weavers and kid-glovers.
Yet in this point of view, there is, in my opinion, a very important sanitary context to be added.
It must be remembered that privation of food is very reluctantly borne, and that as a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations have preceded it.
Such are the sanitary dangers to which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty enough to imply scantiness of food.
These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that the poverty to which they advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness.
In all cases it is the poverty of working populations.
Indeed, as regards the in-door operatives, the work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is for the most part excessively prolonged.
And on a very large scale the nominal self-support can be only a circuit, longer or shorter, to pauperism.
It is otherwise with the “housing of the poor.
“Improvements” of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, warehouses, &c.
“Speaking generally, it may be said that the evils are uncontrolled in England.
The results of the admirable work of Dr.
On the condition of town dwellings, I quote, as preliminary, a general remark of Dr.
To be subject to these influences is a degradation which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it continues to work.
To children who are born under its curse, it must often be a very baptism into infamy.
And beyond all measure hopeless is the wish that persons thus circumstanced should ever in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness.
London takes the first place in over-crowded habitations, absolutely unfit for human beings.
“Rents have become so heavy that few labouring men can afford more than one room.
There is almost no house-property in London that is not overburdened with a number of middlemen.
As a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of “fag-ends of leases.
“Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants while they have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors.
The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk.
The workhouses are already over-crowded, and the “improvements” already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun.
“They try, of course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops.
This same Strand, a main thoroughfare which gives strangers an imposing idea of the wealth of London, may serve as an example of the packing together of human beings in that town.
In one of its parishes, the Officer of Health reckoned 581 persons per acre, although half the width of the Thames was reckoned in.
Hunter, “the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an absurdity, or the public compassion (!
The owner of land, of houses, the businessman, when expropriated by “improvements” such as railroads, the building of new streets, &c.
He must, according to law, human and divine, be comforted for his enforced “abstinence” over and above this by a thumping profit.
The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commercial town, the more rapidly flows the stream of exploitable human material, the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the labourers.
Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district of growing productiveness, takes the next place after London in the housing inferno.
Because of their absolute danger to the community, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the authorities in Newcastle and Gateshead.
The building of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly.
The town was, therefore, in 1865, more full than ever.
“There can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the over-crowding of human beings, and the uncleanliness of their dwellings.
The price per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d.
Hunter, “contains a sample of the finest tribe of our countrymen, often sunk by external circumstances of house and street into an almost savage degradation.
As a result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the state of the dwellings of an industrial town may today be bearable, tomorrow hideous.
Or the aedileship of the town may have pulled itself together for the removal of the most shocking abuses.
Tomorrow, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged Irishmen or decayed English agricultural labourers.
They are stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable labourer’s dwelling is transformed into a lodging house whose personnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years’ war.
There the municipal philistine was just busied with urban improvements.
But now comes that revival of trade which the mildly liberal Mr.
Forster, the negro’s friend, recently crowed over with so much grace.
With the revival of trade came of course an overflow from the waves of the ever fluctuating “reserve army” or “relative surplus population.
Hunter obtained from the agent of an Insurance Company, were for the most part inhabited by well-paid labourers.
They declared that they would willingly pay for better dwellings if they were to be had.
Meanwhile, they become degraded, they fall ill, one and all, whilst the mildly liberal Forster, M.
Bell, one of the poor law doctors of Bradford, ascribes the frightful mortality of fever-patients in his district to the nature of their dwellings.
The beds — and in that term I include any roll of dirty old rags, or an armful of shavings — have an average of 3.
Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of its dwellings.
“Bristol, where the blankest poverty and domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe.
We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, but whose occupation is in great part industrial.
They are the light infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to this point, now to that.
When they are not on the march, they “camp.
A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose neighbourhood it pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, &c.
In undertakings that involve much capital outlay, such as railways, &c.
“Small-pox cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months ago.
As cottage accommodation could not be obtained for them all, huts were built in several places along the line of the works by the contractor, Mr.
Jay promised to appropriate a hut, to which persons in his employ, who were suffering from contagious diseases, might at once be removed.
Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further cases of small-pox in the same huts, and he described their condition as most disgraceful.
The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid categories of the British proletariat.
The price at which they buy their wages was shown on an earlier page.
Here I merely cast a hurried glance over the conditions of their dwellings.
As a rule, the exploiter of a mine, whether its owner or his tenant, builds a number of cottages for his hands.
They receive cottages and coal for firing “for nothing” — i.
Those who are not lodged in this way receive in compensation £4 per annum.
The mining districts attract with rapidity a large population, made up of the miners themselves, and the artisans, shopkeepers, &c.
The ground-rents are high, as they are generally where population is dense.
The master tries, therefore, to run up, within the smallest space possible at the mouth of the pit, just so many cottages as are necessary to pack together his hands and their families.
If new mines are opened in the neighbourhood, or old ones are again set working, the pressure increases.
In the construction of the cottages, only one point of view is of moment, the “abstinence” of the capitalist from all expenditure that is not absolutely unavoidable.
“The lodging which is obtained by the pitman and other labourers connected with the collieries of Northumberland and Durham,” says Dr.
It appears to me that no part of the ‘truck system’ could be worse than what obtains in these densely-populated districts.
The collier is also often supplied with water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has to pay for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages.
It is the same thing when capital “abstains” from protective measures against dangerous machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and for safety in mines, &c.
It is the same here with the housing of the miners.
It would be foreign to the purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits of the above apology.
But in presence of such shameful facts as are vouched for in the annexed reports [those of Dr.
Claims of landlordship are being so used as to do great public wrong.
It will be remembered that the year 1857 brought one of the great crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends.
The next termination of the cycle was due in 1866.
Its outbreak in 1866 was signalised by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, immediately followed by the collapse of countless swindling companies.
One of the great London branches of industry involved in the catastrophe was iron shipbuilding.
Now, a terrible reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end of March, 1867) continues in this and other London industries.
They were waiting for their tickets, but the time had not yet arrived for the distribution.
The yard was a great square place with an open shed running all round it, and several large heaps of snow covered the paving-stones in the middle.
Men were busy, however, in the open shed breaking paving-stones into macadam.
Each man had a big paving-stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the rime-covered granite with a big hammer until he had broken up, and think!
They were picking oakum and disputing the while as to which could work the longest on a given quantity of food — for endurance was the point of honour.
Their number would be more than doubled by the count of those who, having exhausted all their savings, still refuse to apply to the parish, because they have a little left to pawn.
Leaving the workhouse, I took a walk through the streets, mostly of little one-storey houses, that abound in the neighbourhood of Poplar.
My first call was on an ironworker who had been seven and twenty weeks out of employment.
I found the man with his family sitting in a little back room.
The room was not bare of furniture, and there was a fire in it.
This was necessary to keep the naked feet of the young children from getting frost bitten, for it was a bitterly cold day.
On a tray in front of the fire lay a quantity of oakum, which the wife and children were picking in return for their allowance from the parish.
The man worked in the stone yard of the workhouse for a certain ration of food, and threepence per day.
Such desolation, such hopelessness wasabout these people and their little room, as I should not care to witness again.
Our next visit was to an iron labourer’s wife, whose husband had worked in the yards.
We found her ill from want of food, lying on a mattress in her clothes, and just covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been pawned.
Two wretched children were tending her, themselves looking as much in need of nursing as their mother.
On getting outside a young fellow came running after us, and asked us to step inside his house and see if anything could be done for him.
A young wife, two pretty children, a cluster of pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all he had to show.
On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract from a Tory newspaper.
It must not be forgotten that the East-end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of the iron shipbuilding mentioned above, but also of a so-called “home-industry” always underpaid.
“A frightful spectacle was to be seen yesterday in one part of the metropolis.
Although the unemployed thousands of the East-end did not parade with their black flags en masse, the human torrent was imposing enough.
The local ratepayers themselves are driven by the parochial charges to the verge of pauperism.
Assuredly no one was more thoroughly initiated in the mysteries of this happiness than the late M.
Ducpétiaux, inspector-general of Belgian prisons and charitable institutions, and member of the central commission of Belgian statistics.
Let us take his work: “Budgets économiques des classes ouvrières de la Belgique,” Bruxelles, 1855.
The family “consists of father, mother, and four children.
But in ascribing wages to the mother of the family we raise the question of the direction of the household.
How will its internal economy be cared for?
Who will get ready the meals, do the washing and mending?
This is the dilemma incessantly presented to the labourers.
“We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the prisoner.
This figure, compared with that of the daily maintenance of the labourer, shows a difference of 13 centimes.
How comes it, however, that a great number, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more economical way?
In fact, in this “Paradise of capitalists” there follows, on the smallest change in the price of the most essential means of subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes!
Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic production and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in the progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) and the retrogression of the English agricultural labourer.
Before I turn to his present situation, a rapid retrospect.
Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th century, although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has a much earlier date.
“The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him [the gentleman]; while the poor labourer is depressed almost to the earth.
The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti-Jacobin War, during which landed proprietors, farmers, manufacturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, &c.
The nominal wages rose in consequence partly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a rise in the price of the primary means of subsistence independent of this depreciation.
But the actual wage-variation can be evidenced in a very simple way, without entering into details that are here unnecessary.
The ratio between the wages paid by the farmer, and the wage-deficit made good by the parish, shows us two things.
Let us take one county that represents the average condition of things in all counties.
It is self-evident that, under these circumstances, the meagre comforts that Eden still found in the cottage of the agricultural labourer, had vanished by 1814.
Of all the animals kept by the farmer, the labourer, the instrumentum vocale, was, thenceforth, the most oppressed, the worst nourished, the most brutally treated.
“the Swing riots, in 1830, revealed to us (i.
At this time, Sadler, in the House of Commons, christened the agricultural labourers “white slaves,” and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper House.
The most notable political economist of that period — E.
The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new light on the condition of the agricultural labourers.
On the one hand, it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual producers of the corn.
Earl Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief in the aristocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign.
He was, therefore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the revelations of the Morning Chronicle on the condition of the agricultural labourers.
The following list gives the wages paid in three villages in the neighbourhood of Blanford, Wimbourne, and Poole.
The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to English agriculture.
Pusey, Chairman of the Royal Agricultural Society, declares that the (relative) expenses of farming have been reduced nearly one half by the introduction of new machinery.
On the other hand, the actual return of the soil rose rapidly.
Greater outlay of capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapid concentration of farms, were essential conditions of the new method.
It has already been seen that, at the same time, the total number of persons employed in agriculture fell.
If we take this, together with the swift, unbroken extension of the markets, viz.
The means [of subsistence] being always supposed to be a fixed quantity.
As to any further reduction of his income, he may say, nihil habeo nihil curo.
He has no fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply necessary to keep him.
He has reached the zero from which are dated the calculations of the farmer.
Come what will, he has no share either in prosperity or adversity.
In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the conditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals condemned to transportation and penal servitude.
The results are recorded in two voluminous Blue books.
“The diet of the English prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary labourers in England.
“Is there anything that you are aware of to account for the necessity of feeding them very much better than ordinary labourers?
From the tables appended to the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed comparative summary.
The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission of 1863 on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already known to the reader.
He will remember that the diet of a great part of the agricultural labourers’ families is below the minimum necessary “to arrest starvation diseases.
“The nourishment obtained by the labourer himself,” says Dr.
The quantity of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the period of rapid growth, is in many cases, in almost every county, deficient, and particularly in nitrogen.
The male and female servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nourished.
“The labour of women in the fields,” says Dr.
“To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the house accommodation generally had,” says Dr.
Simon, in his official Health Report, “by our agricultural labourers, almost every page of Dr.
Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has been in very rapid increase, and the household circumstances of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable.
Except in so far as they whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the matter.
As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice to refer to the evidence which Dr.
When the process of depopulation has completed itself, the result, says Dr.
Where things are tending to the above result, often the cottages which stand, testify, in their unrepaired and wretched condition, to the extinction to which they are doomed.
They are seen standing in the various stages of natural decay.
While the shelter holds together, the labourer is permitted to rent it, and glad enough he will often be to do so, even at the price of decent lodging.
But no repair, no improvement shall it receive, except such as its penniless occupants can supply.
And when at last it becomes quite uninhabitable — uninhabitable even to the humblest standard of serfdom — it will be but one more destroyed cottage, and future poor-rates will be somewhat lightened.
To that daily toil there will then have to be added, as though it were nothing, the daily need of walking six or eight miles for power of earning his bread.
And whatever farmwork is done by his wife and children, is done at the same disadvantage.
Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance occasions him.
In the open village, cottage-speculators buy scraps of land, which they throng as densely as they can with the cheapest of all possible hovels.
There are landlords who deem any stye good enough for their labourer and his family, and who yet do not disdain to drive with him the hardest possible bargain for rent.
From brighter, but exceptional scenes, it is requisite in the interests of justice, that attention should again be drawn to the overwhelming preponderance of facts which are a reproach to the civilisation of England.
For years the over-crowding of rural labourers’ dwellings has been a matter of deep concern, not only to persons who care for sanitary good, but to persons who care for decent and moral life.
And those who have denounced the over-crowded state of our rural population have not been silent as to a further mischief.
Even where their primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often almost perforce they have referred to other relations on the subject.
Thus, for instance, in the appendix of my last annual report, Dr.
A few weeks ago 13 persons slept in it.
I will give a few specimens culled from a dozen counties.
The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only supplies a hole.
As soon as one has made a privy, it is made use of by the whole neighbourhood.
One house, belonging to a family called Richardson, was of quite unapproachable beauty.
“Its plaster walls bulged very like a lady’s dress in a curtsey.
One gable end was convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfortunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like an elephant’s trunk.
A long stick served as prop to prevent the chimney from falling.
They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of the family.
The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work together to pay it.
Only one of the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms.
Half a window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of all flesh.
Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade Union.
A daughter came home from service with scarlet fever.
The mother and one child were down with typhus when Dr.
A man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters and one grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls in the passage.
Each of the latter had a child while the family was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confinement and then came home.
Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less.
Great part of this newly built in good style; demand for houses appears very marked, since very miserable cots let at 1s.
Here the landlords, in view of the increasing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent.
Each of these families had less space than is considered necessary for a convict.
No house had more than one bedroom, not one of them a back-door; water very scarce; weekly rent from 1s.
But then, the ancient dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional ventilation.
It contains the wretchedest cots to be found anywhere.
“A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth,” reigns in Gamblingay.
The neglect in its centre, becomes mortification at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are rotting to pieces.
The absentee landlords bleed this poor rookery too freely.
In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and of cottages go, in many parishes, hand in hand.
In not less than 22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevented increase of population, or has not brought about that expulsion which, under the name “migration to towns,” generally occurs.
But the people did not wish to go away, and managed even to increase under these circumstances.
This little county has suffered more from the “eviction-spirit” than any other in England.
At Nadby, overcrowded cottages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part to the farmers.
These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of the inmates are able to farm small allotments at 10s.
These allotments are at a distance from the houses, which are without privies.
The bedroom is a garret: the walls run together into the roof like a sugar-loaf, a dormer-window opening in front.
He lived there, because it was a tenantable cot,” and because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, at any price, and in any conditions.
Kennington, very seriously over-populated in 1859, when diphtheria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a medical inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes.
He found that in this locality, where much labour is employed, various cots had been destroyed and no new ones built.
Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour, on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing glances.
Feverishly overworked in summer, and half-starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, “the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death at them.
Pentill, in the same parish: a cot let at Is.
Some of the farmers declare that the cots are “a great nuisance here, because they bring the poor.
“Now these poor must come from somewhere, and as there is no particular attraction, such as doles, at Badsey, it must be repulsion from some other unfit place, which will send them here.
If each could find an allotment near his work, he would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground twice as much as the farmer pays for his.
The continual emigration to the towns, the continual formation of surplus population in the country through the concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, machinery, &c.
The packing together of knots of men in scattered little villages and small country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the surface of the land.
The continuous superseding of the agricultural labourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the increasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism.
Thus the minimum of wages becomes a law of Nature to them.
On the other hand, the land, in spite of its constant “relative surplus population,” is at the same time underpopulated.
This is seen, not only locally at the points where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making, &c.
It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as well as in spring and summer, at those frequently recurring times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants extra hands.
There are always too many agricultural labourers for the ordinary, and always too few for the exceptional or temporary needs of the cultivation of the soil.
Hence we find in the official documents contradictory complaints from the same places of deficiency and excess of labour simultaneously.
The temporary or local want of labour brings about no rise in wages, but a forcing of the women and children into the fields, and exploitation at an age constantly lowered.
In the east of England thrives a beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — the so-called gang-system, to which I must briefly return here.
The gang-system obtains almost exclusively in the counties of Lincoln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Nottingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of Northampton, Bedford, and Rutland.
A large part of this county is new land, marsh formerly, or even, as in others of the eastern counties just named, won lately from the sea.
The steam-engine has worked wonders in the way of drainage.
What were once fens and sandbanks, bear now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents.
The same thing holds of the alluvial lands won by human endeavour, as in the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the Trent.
There alone had the population formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the winter-time.
For every 100 acres there is, on an average, scarcely one cottage.
I have not one cottage on my farm.
I have only one labourer on my farm now.
The soil requires much light field labour, such as weeding, hoeing, certain processes of manuring, removing of stones, &c.
This is done by the gangs, or organised bands that dwell in the open villages.
At the head is the gang-master, always an ordinary agricultural labourer, generally what is called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady, drunken, but with a dash of enterprise and savoir-faire.
He is the recruiting-sergeant for the gang, which works under him, not under the farmer.
Employment by him is, therefore, much more lucrative and more certain for the labouring families, than employment by the individual farmer, who only employs children occasionally.
This circumstance so completely rivets his influence in the open villages that children are generally only to be hired through his instrumentality.
The lending out of these individually, independently of the gang, is his second trade.
Although the gang-master, who, in some districts is called “the driver,” is armed with a long stick, he uses it but seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment are exceptional.
He is a democratic emperor, or a kind of Pied Piper of Hamelin.
He must therefore be popular with his subjects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy life under his direction.
Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and obscenest impudence give attractions to the gang.
On the return journey what Fourier calls “phanerogamie,” is the order of the day.
The open villages which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms and Gomorrahs, and have twice as high a rate of illegitimate births as the rest of the kingdom.
The moral character of girls bred in these schools, when married women, was shown above.
Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, are born recruits of the gang.
The gang in its classical form just described, is called the public, common, or tramping gang.
The gipsy fun has vanished here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment of the children is worse.
The gang-system, which during the last years has steadily increased, clearly does not exist for the sake of the gang-master.
It exists for the enrichment of the large farmers, and indirectly of the landlords.
The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole and counterpole of capitalistic production.
In concluding this section, we must travel for a moment to Ireland.
The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied by a decrease in the mass of products.
Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of subsistence for cattle and for men.
In the following table is calculated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as compared with its immediate predecessor.
The Cereal Crops include wheat, oats, barley, rye, beans, and peas; the Green Crops, potatoes, turnips, marigolds, beet-root, cabbages, carrots, parsnips, vetches, &c.
From the movement of population and the agricultural produce of Ireland, we pass to the movement in the purse of its landlords, larger farmers, and industrial capitalists.
It is reflected in the rise and fall of the Income-tax.
England, a country with fully developed capitalist production, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered.
But Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of England, marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it yields corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military recruits.
Nevertheless, with the fall in numbers of the population, rents and farmers’ profits rose, although the latter not as steadily as the former.
On the one hand, with the throwing of small holdings into large ones, and the change of arable into pasture land, a larger part of the whole produce was transformed into surplus-produce.
The surplus-produce increased, although the total produce, of which it formed a fraction, decreased.
On the other hand, the money value of this surplus-produce increased yet more rapidly than its mass, in consequence of the rise in the English market price of meat, wool, &c.
And, however small its absolute increase, in proportion to the dwindling population it had increased largely.
This is a far more important experiment than was the plague in the middle of the 14th century so belauded of Malthusians.
To the wealth of the country it did not the slightest damage.
The exodus of the next 20 years, an exodus still constantly increasing, did not, as, e.
Irish genius discovered an altogether new way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away from the scene of its misery.
The exiles transplanted to the United States, send home sums of money every year as travelling expenses for those left behind.
Every troop that emigrates one year, draws another after it the next.
Thus, instead of costing Ireland anything, emigration forms one of the most lucrative branches of its export trade.
What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left behind and freed from the surplus population?
The revolution in agriculture has kept pace with emigration.
The production of relative surplus population has more than kept pace with the absolute depopulation.
In England the cultivation of green crops increases with the breeding of cattle; in Ireland, it decreases.
Like all other great modern industries, it constantly produces, by incessant fluctuations, a relative surplus population within its own sphere, even with an absolute increase in the mass of human beings absorbed by it.
The misery of the agricultural population forms the pedestal for gigantic shirt-factories, whose armies of labourers are, for the most part, scattered over the country.
Here, we encounter again the system described above of domestic industry, which in underpayment and overwork, possesses its own systematic means for creating supernumerary labourers.
Finally, although the depopulation has not such destructive consequences as would result in a country with fully developed capitalistic production, it does not go on without constant reaction upon the home-market.
The gap which emigration causes here, limits not only the local demand for labour, but also the incomes of small shopkeepers, artisans, tradespeople generally.
A clear statement of the condition of the agricultural labourers in Ireland is to be found in the Reports of the Irish Poor Law Inspectors (1870).
Officials of a government which is maintained only by bayonets and by a state of siege, now open, now disguised, they have to observe all the precautions of language that their colleagues in England disdain.
In spite of this, however, they do not let their government cradle itself in illusions.
For proof, the following extract from the official accounts of an Irish workhouse.
The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore fully twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as they were 20 years before.
Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far from accurate.
Before the famine, the great mass of agricultural wages were paid in kind, only the smallest part in money; today, payment in money is the rule.
From this it follows that, whatever the amount of the real wage, its money rate must rise.
In fact, formerly, the agricultural labourers were but the smallest of the small farmers, and formed for the most part a kind of rear-guard of the medium and large farms on which they found employment.
Only since the catastrophe of 1846 have they begun to form a fraction of the class of purely wage labourers, a special class, connected with its wage-masters only by monetary relations.
We know what were the conditions of their dwellings in 1846.
And this holds generally with the exception of certain tracts of Ulster; in the south, in the counties of Cork, Limerick, Kilkenny, &c.
“The agricultural labourers’ huts,” an inspector cries out, “are a disgrace to the Christianity and to the civilisation of this country.
In order to increase the attractions of these holes for the labourers, the pieces of land belonging thereto from time immemorial, are systematically confiscated.
The first act of the agricultural revolution was to sweep away the huts situated on the field of labour.
This was done on the largest scale, and as if in obedience to a command from on high.
Thus many labourers were compelled to seek shelter in villages and towns.
There they were thrown like refuse into garrets, holes, cellars and corners, in the worst back slums.
The men are now obliged to seek work of the neighbouring farmers and are only hired by the day, and therefore under the most precarious form of wage.
“they sometimes have long distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and suffer much hardship, not unfrequently ending in sickness, disease and want.
These results of the agricultural revolution — i.
It will be remembered that we met, in the English agricultural proletariat, with a similar spectacle.
The atmosphere of these cabins, combined with the other privations they are subjected to, has made this class particularly susceptible to low fever and pulmonary consumption.
This is the land of Cockaigne, into which the great Malthusian panacea, depopulation, has transformed green Erin.
That he was a skilled factory hand, may be understood when I say that he was employed on goods for the Manchester market.
The oldest girl who is 12, minds the house.
She is also cook, and all the servant we have.
She gets the young ones ready for school.
A girl going past the house wakes me at half past five in the morning.
My wife gets up and goes along with me.
We get nothing (to eat) before we come to work.
The child of 12 takes care of the little children all the day, and we get nothing till breakfast at eight.
We get tea once a week; at other times we get stirabout, sometimes of oat-meal, sometimes of Indian meal, as we are able to get it.
In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our Indian meal.
In the summer we get a few potatoes, planting a small patch ourselves; and when they are done we get back to stirabout.
Sometimes we get a little milk as it may be.
So we go on from day to day, Sunday and week day, always the same the year round.
We may see a bit of flesh meat sometimes, but very seldom.
Three of our children attend school, for whom we pay 1d.
Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life!
In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in England.
Lord Dufferin is one of those land magnates.
That rent-rolls and profits can ever be “excessive,” or that their plethora is in any way connected with plethora of the people’s misery is, of course, an idea as “disreputable” as “unsound.
The fact is that, as the Irish population diminishes, the Irish rent-rolls swell; that depopulation benefits the landlords, therefore also benefits the soil, and, therefore, the people, that mere accessory of the soil.
He declares, therefore, that Ireland is still over-populated, and the stream of emigration still flows too lazily.
To be perfectly happy, Ireland must get rid of at least one-third of a million of labouring men.
Lord Dufferin demands a new blood-letting of one-third of a million only, instead of about two millions; in fact, without the getting rid of these, the millennium in Erin is not to be.
And as l’appétit vient en mangeant, Rentroll’s eyes will soon discover that Ireland, with 3½ millions, is still always miserable, and miserable because she is overpopulated.
Therefore her depopulation must go yet further, that thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that of an English sheep-walk and cattle-pasture.
Like all good things in this bad world, this profitable method has its drawbacks.
With the accumulation of rents in Ireland, the accumulation of the Irish in America keeps pace.
We have seen how money is changed into capital; how through capital surplus-value is made, and from surplus-value more capital.
But the accumulation of capital presupposes surplus-value; surplus-value presupposes capitalistic production; capitalistic production presupposes the pre-existence of considerable masses of capital and of labour power in the hands of producers of commodities.
This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy about the same part as original sin in theology.
Adam bit the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race.
Its origin is supposed to be explained when it is told as an anecdote of the past.
In times long gone by there were two sorts of people; one, the diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and more, in riotous living.
Thus it came to pass that the former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing to sell except their own skins.
Such insipid childishness is every day preached to us in the defence of property.
In actual history it is notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, briefly force, play the great part.
In the tender annals of Political Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial.
Right and “labour” were from all time the sole means of enrichment, the present year of course always excepted.
As a matter of fact, the methods of primitive accumulation are anything but idyllic.
In themselves money and commodities are no more capital than are the means of production and of subsistence.
But this transformation itself can only take place under certain circumstances that centre in this, viz.
Free labourers, in the double sense that neither they themselves form part and parcel of the means of production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &c.
With this polarization of the market for commodities, the fundamental conditions of capitalist production are given.
The capitalist system presupposes the complete separation of the labourers from all property in the means by which they can realize their labour.
As soon as capitalist production is once on its own legs, it not only maintains this separation, but reproduces it on a continually extending scale.
The so-called primitive accumulation, therefore, is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the means of production.
It appears as primitive, because it forms the prehistoric stage of capital and of the mode of production corresponding with it.
The economic structure of capitalist society has grown out of the economic structure of feudal society.
The dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the former.
The immediate producer, the labourer, could only dispose of his own person after he had ceased to be attached to the soil and ceased to be the slave, serf, or bondsman of another.
And the history of this, their expropriation, is written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire.
The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their part not only to displace the guild masters of handicrafts, but also the feudal lords, the possessors of the sources of wealth.
The chevaliers d’industrie, however, only succeeded in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of events of which they themselves were wholly innocent.
They have risen by means as vile as those by which the Roman freedman once on a time made himself the master of his patronus.
The starting point of the development that gave rise to the wage labourer as well as to the capitalist, was the servitude of the labourer.
The advance consisted in a change of form of this servitude, in the transformation of feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation.
To understand its march, we need not go back very far.
Wherever it appears, the abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign towns, has been long on the wane.
The expropriation of the agricultural producer, of the peasant, from the soil, is the basis of the whole process.
The history of this expropriation, in different countries, assumes different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, and at different periods.
In England alone, which we take as our example, has it the classic form.
In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last part of the 14th century.
The immense majority of the population consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th century, of free peasant proprietors, whatever was the feudal title under which their right of property was hidden.
In the larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, was displaced by the free farmer.
The wage labourers of agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised their leisure time by working on the large estates, partly of an independent special class of wage labourers, relatively and absolutely few in numbers.
The latter also were practically at the same time peasant farmers, since, besides their wages, they had allotted to them arable land to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their cottages.
Besides they, with the rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of the common land, which gave pasture to their cattle, furnished them with timber, fire-wood, turf, &c.
In all countries of Europe, feudal production is characterised by division of the soil amongst the greatest possible number of subfeudatories.
A mass of free proletarians was hurled on the labour market by the breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James Steuart well says, “everywhere uselessly filled house and castle.
The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manufactures, and the corresponding rise in the price of wool in England, gave the direct impulse to these evictions.
The old nobility had been devoured by the great feudal wars.
The new nobility was the child of its time, for which money was the power of all powers.
Transformation of arable land into sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry.
Harrison, in his “Description of England, prefixed to Holinshed’s Chronicles,” describes how the expropriation of small peasants is ruining the country.
As Thornton rightly has it, the English working class was precipitated without any transition from its golden into its iron age.
It did not yet stand on that height of civilization where the “wealth of the nation” (i.
The Act, therefore, ordains the rebuilding of the decayed farmsteads, and fixes a proportion between corn land and pasture land, &c.
The cry of the people and the legislation directed, for 150 years after Henry VII.
The secret of their inefficiency Bacon, without knowing it, reveals to us.
During this transformation period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by the cottage of the agricultural wage labourer, and forbad him to take lodgers into his cottage.
As late as the first half of the 18th century complaint is made if the cottage of the agricultural labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of land.
Nowadays he is lucky if it is furnished with a little garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few roods.
A few acres to the cottage would make the labourers too independent.
The process of forcible expropriation of the people received in the 16th century a new and frightful impulse from the Reformation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation of the church property.
The Catholic church was, at the time of the Reformation, feudal proprietor of a great part of the English land.
The legally guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the church’s tithes was tacitly confiscated.
“Pauper ubique jacet,” cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through England.
In the 43rd year of her reign the nation was obliged to recognise pauperism officially by the introduction of a poor-rate.
“The authors of this law seem to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, for [contrary to traditional usage] it has no preamble whatever.
These immediate results of the Reformation were not its most lasting ones.
The property of the church formed the religious bulwark of the traditional conditions of landed property.
With its fall these were no longer tenable.
Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, the class of independent peasants, were more numerous than the class of farmers.
We leave on one side here the purely economic causes of the agricultural revolution.
We deal only with the forcible means employed.
After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation, effected everywhere on the Continent without any legal formality.
They abolished the feudal tenure of land, i.
The “glorious Revolution” brought into power, along with William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist appropriators of surplus-value.
They inaugurated the new era by practising on a colossal scale thefts of state lands, thefts that had been hitherto managed more modestly.
These estates were given away, sold at a ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by direct seizure.
All this happened without the slightest observation of legal etiquette.
Besides, the new landed aristocracy was the natural ally of the new bankocracy, of the newly-hatched haute finance, and of the large manufacturers, then depending on protective duties.
Communal property — always distinct from the State property just dealt with — was an old Teutonic institution which lived on under cover of feudalism.
But, at that time, the process was carried on by means of individual acts of violence against which legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain.
Hence the most vigorous polemic, in the economic literature of that time, on the “enclosure of commons.
The ruins of former dwelling-houses, barns, stables, &c.
All these are hereby thrown out of their livings with their families and many other families who were chiefly employed and supported by them.
“I have here in view enclosures of open fields and lands already improved.
Towns and manufactures will increase, because more will be driven to them in quest of places and employment.
This is the way in which the engrossing of farms naturally operates.
And this is the way in which, for many years, it has been actually operating in this kingdom.
From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the state of day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their subsistence in that state has become more difficult.
Their wages, he says, “were not more than enough for the absolute necessaries of life.
Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an opponent of Dr.
In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion between the agricultural labourer and the communal property had, of course, vanished.
The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricultural population from the soil is, finally, the so-called clearing of estates, i.
All the English methods hitherto considered culminated in “clearing.
But what “clearing of estates” really and properly signifies, we learn only in the promised land of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland.
The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which was the owner of the land on which it was settled.
The representative of the clan, its chief or “great man,” was only the titular owner of this property, just as the Queen of England is the titular owner of all the national soil.
On their own authority they transformed their nominal right into a right of private property, and as this brought them into collision with their clansmen, resolved to drive them out by open force.
“A king of England might as well claim to drive his subjects into the sea,” says Professor Newman.
This revolution, which began in Scotland after the last rising of the followers of the Pretender, can be followed through its first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart and James Anderson.
In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were forbidden to emigrate from the country, with a view to driving them by force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns.
As an example of the method obtaining in the 19th century, the “clearing” made by the Duchess of Sutherland will suffice here.
All their villages were destroyed and burnt, all their fields turned into pasturage.
British soldiers enforced this eviction, and came to blows with the inhabitants.
One old woman was burnt to death in the flames of the hut, which she refused to leave.
The Duchess, in the nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an average rent of 2s.
The whole of the stolen clanland she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each inhabited by a single family, for the most part imported English farm-servants.
The remnant of the aborigines flung on the sea-shore tried to live by catching fish.
They became amphibious and lived, as an English author says, half on land and half on water, and withal only half on both.
But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the “great men” of the clan.
The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the great men.
They scented some profit in it, and let the sea-shore to the great fishmongers of London.
For the second time the Gaels were hunted out.
But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into deer preserves.
Every one knows that there are no real forests in England.
The deer in the parks of the great are demurely domestic cattle, fat as London aldermen.
Scotland is therefore the last refuge of the “noble passion.
Here, on one side of Gaick, you have the new forest of Glenfeshie; and there on the other you have the new forest of Ardverikie.
In the same line you have the Black Mount, an immense waste also recently erected.
Sheep were introduced into glens which had been the seats of communities of small farmers; and the latter were driven to seek subsistence on coarser and more sterile tracks of soil.
Now deer are supplanting sheep; and these are once more dispossessing the small tenants, who will necessarily be driven down upon still coarser land and to more grinding penury.
One or other of the two must yield.
Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands scarcely less severe than those occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings.
They conquered the field for capitalistic agriculture, made the soil part and parcel of capital, and created for the town industries the necessary supply of a “free” and outlawed proletariat.
On the other hand, these men, suddenly dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly adapt themselves to the discipline of their new condition.
They were turned en masse into beggars, robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, in most cases from stress of circumstances.
The fathers of the present working class were chastised for their enforced transformation into vagabonds and paupers.
Legislation treated them as “voluntary” criminals, and assumed that it depended on their own good will to go on working under the old conditions that no longer existed.
In England this legislation began under Henry VII.
On the other hand, whipping and imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds.
The master shall feed his slave on bread and water, weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit.
He has the right to force him to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains.
The master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire as a slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle.
If the slaves attempt anything against the masters, they are also to be executed.
Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down.
If the vagabond gives a false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, of its inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an S.
If they run away, they are to become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who can put them in irons, whip them, &c.
Every master may put an iron ring round the neck, arms or legs of his slave, by which to know him more easily and to be more certain of him.
The last part of this statute provides, that certain poor people may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing to give them food and drink and to find them work.
This kind of parish slaves was kept up in England until far into the 19th century under the name of “roundsmen.
James 1: Any one wandering about and begging is declared a rogue and a vagabond.
Incorrigible and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an R on the left shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging again, to be executed without mercy.
Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was established in Paris.
Of the same nature are the statute of Charles V.
Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated from the soil, driven from their homes, turned into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws grotesquely terrible, into the discipline necessary for the wage system.
Neither is it enough that they are compelled to sell it voluntarily.
The advance of capitalist production develops a working class, which by education, tradition, habit, looks upon the conditions of that mode of production as self-evident laws of Nature.
The organisation of the capitalist process of production, once fully developed, breaks down all resistance.
The constant generation of a relative surplus-population keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and therefore keeps wages, in a rut that corresponds with the wants of capital.
The dull compulsion of economic relations completes the subjection of the labourer to the capitalist.
Direct force, outside economic conditions, is of course still used, but only exceptionally.
In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to the “natural laws of production,” i.
It is otherwise during the historic genesis of capitalist production.
The bourgeoisie, at its rise, wants and uses the power of the state to “regulate” wages, i.
This is an essential element of the so-called primitive accumulation.
In country and town master and workmen stood close together socially.
The subordination of labour to capital was only formal — i.
The demand for wage labour grew, therefore, rapidly with every accumulation of capital, whilst the supply of wage labour followed but slowly.
A large part of the national product, changed later into a fund of capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the consumption-fund of the labourer.
Legislation on wage labour (from the first, aimed at the exploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced, always equally hostile to him), is started in England by the Statute of Labourers, of Edward III.
The ordinance of 1350 in France, issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it.
English and French legislation run parallel and are identical in purport.
So far as the labour-statutes aim at compulsory extension of the working-day, I do not return to them, as this point was treated earlier (Chap.
The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance of the House of Commons.
“Formerly the poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry and wealth.
Next, their wages are so low as to threaten industry and wealth equally and perhaps more, but in another way.
A tariff of wages was fixed by law for town and country, for piece-work and day-work.
The agricultural labourers were to hire themselves out by the year, the town ones “in open market.
In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had, as we know, become much worse.
The money wage rose, but not in proportion to the depreciation of money and the corresponding rise in the prices of commodities.
Nevertheless, the laws for keeping them down remained in force, together with the ear-clipping and branding of those “whom no one was willing to take into service.
How completely in the meantime circumstances had changed, is proved by an occurrence unheard-of before in the English Lower House.
Pitt opposed this, but confessed that the “condition of the poor was cruel.
They were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory by his private legislation, and could by the poor-rates make up the wage of the agricultural labourer to the indispensable minimum.
The barbarous laws against Trades’ Unions fell in 1825 before the threatening bearing of the proletariat.
Certain beautiful fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859.
Two years earlier, the same House of Commons and the same Mr.
Gladstone in the well-known straightforward fashion brought in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal legislation against the working class.
During the very first storms of the revolution, the French bourgeoisie dared to take away from the workers the right of association but just acquired.
This law which, by means of State compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions and changes of dynasties.
Even the Reign of Terror left it untouched.
It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code.
Nothing is more characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois coup d’état.
For the expropriation of the agricultural population creates, directly, none but the greatest landed proprietors.
As far, however, as concerns the genesis of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand on it, because it is a slow process evolving through many centuries.
The serfs, as well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different tenures, and were therefore emancipated under very different economic conditions.
In England the first form of the farmer is the bailiff, himself a serf.
His position is similar to that of the old Roman villicus, only in a more limited sphere of action.
During the second half of the 14th century he is replaced by a farmer, whom the landlord provided with seed, cattle and implements.
His condition is not very different from that of the peasant.
He advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord the other.
The two divide the total product in proportions determined by contract.
The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment greatly his stock of cattle, almost without cost, whilst they yielded him a richer supply of manure for the tillage of the soil.
To this was added in the 16th century a very important element.
At that time the contracts for farms ran for a long time, often for 99 years.
The progressive fall in the value of the precious metals, and therefore of money, brought the farmers golden fruit.
Apart from all the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered wages.
A portion of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm.
Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their labourers and their landlords.
No wonder, therefore, that England, at the end of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, considering the circumstances of the time.
Anderson (not to be confounded with James Anderson), in his “History of Commerce,” believe in the direct intervention of Providence.
We must still pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation.
With the setting free of a part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former means of nourishment were also set free.
They were now transformed into material elements of variable capital.
The peasant, expropriated and cast adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from his new master, the industrial capitalist.
That which holds good of the means of subsistence holds with the raw materials of industry dependent upon home agriculture.
They were transformed into an element of constant capital.
At the same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weaving, in which the men “set free” now work for wages.
Not a fibre of it is changed, but a new social soul has popped into its body.
It forms now a part of the constant capital of the master manufacturer.
The extra labour expended in flax-spinning realised itself formerly in extra income to numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederick II’s time, in taxes pour le roi de Prusse.
It realises itself now in profit for a few capitalists.
The spindles and looms, formerly scattered over the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few great labour-barracks, together with the labourers and the raw material.
And spindles, looms, raw material, are now transformed from means of independent existence for the spinners and weavers, into means for commanding them and sucking out of them unpaid labour.
Nevertheless, the popular intuition was not at fault.
In the time of Mirabeau, the lion of the Revolution, the great manufactories were still called manufactures réunies, workshops thrown into one, as we speak of fields thrown into one.
“We are only paying attention to the grand manufactories, in which hundreds of men work under a director and which are commonly called manufactures réunies.
Those where a very large number of labourers work, each separately and on his own account, are hardly considered; they are placed at an infinite distance from the others.
The large workshop (manufacture réunie) will enrich prodigiously one or two entrepreneurs, but the labourers will only be journeymen, paid more or less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking.
Discrete workshops, for the most part combined with cultivation of small holdings, are the only free ones.
In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into wage labourers, and their means of subsistence and of labour into material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a home-market for the latter.
Formerly, the peasant family produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials, which they themselves, for the most part, consumed.
These raw materials and means of subsistence have now become commodities; the large farmer sells them, he finds his market in manufactures.
The many scattered customers, whom stray artisans until now had found in the numerous small producers working on their own account, concentrate themselves now into one great market provided for by industrial capital.
Thus, hand in hand with the expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separation from their means of production, goes the destruction of rural domestic industry, the process of separation between manufacture and agriculture.
And only the destruction of rural domestic industry can give the internal market of a country that extension and consistence which the capitalist mode of production requires.
Still the manufacturing period, properly so called, does not succeed in carrying out this transformation radically and completely.
If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, at certain points, it calls them up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the preparation of raw material up to a certain point.
This is one, though not the chief, cause of a phenomenon which, at first, puzzles the student of English history.
From the last third of the 15th century he finds continually complaints, only interrupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of capitalist farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction of the peasantry.
On the other hand, he always finds this peasantry turning up again, although in diminished number, and always under worse conditions.
The chief reason is: England is at one time chiefly a cultivator of corn, at another chiefly a breeder of cattle, in alternate periods, and with these the extent of peasant cultivation fluctuates.
It therefore also, for the first time, conquers for industrial capital the entire home market.
The genesis of the industrial * capitalist did not proceed in such a gradual way as that of the farmer.
Doubtless many small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, or even wage labourers, transformed themselves into small capitalists, and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage labour and corresponding accumulation) into full-blown capitalists.
The snail’s pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the commercial requirements of the new world market that the great discoveries of the end of the 15th century created.
The power of the capitalist over all the wealth of the country is a complete change in the right of property, and by what law, or series of laws, was it effected?
The author should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws.
The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce was prevented from turning into industrial capital, in the country by the feudal constitution, in the towns by the guild organisation.
These fetters vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with the expropriation and partial eviction of the country population.
The new manufactures were established at sea-ports, or at inland points beyond the control of the old municipalities and their guilds.
Hence in England an embittered struggle of the corporate towns against these new industrial nurseries.
These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation.
On their heels treads the commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre.
It begins with the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions in England’s Anti-Jacobin War, and is still going on in the opium wars against China, &c.
The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute themselves now, more or less in chronological order, particularly over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England.
In England at the end of the 17th century, they arrive at a systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the national debt, the modern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system.
These methods depend in part on brute force, e.
Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one.
Nothing is more characteristic than their system of stealing men, to get slaves for Java.
The men stealers were trained for this purpose.
The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the chief agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers.
The young people stolen, were thrown into the secret dungeons of Celebes, until they were ready for sending to the slave-ships.
To secure Malacca, the Dutch corrupted the Portuguese governor.
He let them into the town in 1641.
Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed.
But the coasting trade of India and between the islands, as well as the internal trade of India, were the monopoly of the higher employés of the company.
The monopolies of salt, opium, betel and other commodities, were inexhaustible mines of wealth.
The employés themselves fixed the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus.
The Governor-General took part in this private traffic.
His favourites received contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than the alchemists, made gold out of nothing.
Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a day; primitive accumulation went on without the advance of a shilling.
The trial of Warren Hastings swarms with such cases.
A contract for opium was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his departure on an official mission to a part of India far removed from the opium district.
But even in the colonies properly so called, the Christian character of primitive accumulation did not belie itself.
Some decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on the descendants of the pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in the meantime.
At English instigation and for English pay they were tomahawked by red-skins.
The British Parliament proclaimed bloodhounds and scalping as “means that God and Nature had given into its hand.
The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and navigation.
The “societies Monopolia” of Luther were powerful levers for concentration of capital.
The colonies secured a market for the budding manufactures, and, through the monopoly of the market, an increased accumulation.
The treasures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslavement, and murder, floated back to the mother-country and were there turned into capital.
Holland, which first fully developed the colonial system, in 1648 stood already in the acme of its commercial greatness.
“in almost exclusive possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce between the south-east and north-west of Europe.
Its fisheries, marine, manufactures, surpassed those of any other country.
The total capital of the Republic was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together.
In the period of manufacture properly so called, it is, on the other hand, the commercial supremacy that gives industrial predominance.
Hence the preponderant rôle that the colonial system plays at that time.
It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim of humanity.
The colonial system with its maritime trade and commercial wars served as a forcing-house for it.
The only part of the so-called national wealth that actually enters into the collective possessions of modern peoples is their national debt.
Hence, as a necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in debt.
And with the rise of national debt-making, want of faith in the national debt takes the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven.
The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive accumulation.
The state creditors actually give nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed into public bonds, easily negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just as so much hard cash would.
It was allowed to use these notes for discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for buying the precious metals.
It was not long ere this credit-money, made by the bank itself, became.
The coin in which the Bank of England made its loans to the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest on the public debt.
It was not enough that the bank gave with one hand and took back more with the other; it remained, even whilst receiving, the eternal creditor of the nation down to the last shilling advanced.
Gradually it became inevitably the receptacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of gravity of all commercial credit.
What effect was produced on their contemporaries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats, financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &c.
With the national debt arose an international credit system, which often conceals one of the sources of primitive accumulation in this or that people.
Thus the villainies of the Venetian thieving system formed one of the secret bases of the capital-wealth of Holland to whom Venice in her decadence lent large sums of money.
So also was it with Holland and England.
By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch manufactures were far outstripped.
Holland had ceased to be the nation preponderant in commerce and industry.
The same thing is going on today between England and the United States.
A great deal of capital, which appears today in the United States without any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, the capitalised blood of children.
As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue, which must cover the yearly payments for interest, &c.
The loans enable the government to meet extraordinary expenses, without the tax-payers feeling it immediately, but they necessitate, as a consequence, increased taxes.
On the other hand, the raising of taxation caused by the accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels the government always to have recourse to new loans for new extraordinary expenses.
Modern fiscality, whose pivot is formed by taxes on the most necessary means of subsistence (thereby increasing their price), thus contains within itself the germ of automatic progression.
Overtaxation is not an incident, but rather a principle.
In Holland, therefore, where this system was first inaugurated, the great patriot, DeWitt, has in his “Maxims” extolled it as the best system for making the wage labourer submissive, frugal, industrious, and overburdened with labour.
On this there are not two opinions, even among the bourgeois economists.
Its expropriating efficacy is still further heightened by the system of protection, which forms one of its integral parts.
They also forcibly rooted out, in their dependent countries, all industry, as, e.
On the continent of Europe, after Colbert’s example, the process was much simplified.
The primitive industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the state treasury.
“Why,” cries Mirabeau, “why go so far to seek the cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war?
Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, commercial wars, &c.
The birth of the latter is heralded by a great slaughter of the innocents.
Like the royal navy, the factories were recruited by means of the press-gang.
“In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and more particularly in Lancashire,” says Fielden, “the newly-invented machinery was used in large factories built on the sides of streams capable of turning the water-wheel.
Thousands of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from towns; and Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, comparatively thinly populated and barren, a population was all that she now wanted.
The small and nimble fingers of little children being by very far the most in request, the custom instantly sprang up of procuring apprentices from the different parish workhouses of London, Birmingham, and elsewhere.
The beautiful and romantic valleys of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, became the dismal solitudes of torture, and of many a murder.
It is a common tradition in Lancashire, that the beds never get cold.
With the development of capitalist production during the manufacturing period, the public opinion of Europe had lost the last remnant of shame and conscience.
The nations bragged cynically of every infamy that served them as a means to capitalistic accumulation.
This threw, at the same time, an official cloak over British smuggling.
Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to the transformation of the earlier, more or less patriarchal slavery, into a system of commercial exploitation.
In fact, the veiled slavery of the wage workers in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the new world.
If money, according to Augier, “comes into the world with a congenital blood-stain on one cheek,” capital comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt.
What does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.
In so far as it is not immediate transformation of slaves and serfs into wage labourers, and therefore a mere change of form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers, i.
Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property, exists only where the means of labour and the external conditions of labour belong to private individuals.
But according as these private individuals are labourers or not labourers, private property has a different character.
The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the intermediate stages lying between these two extremes.
Of course, this petty mode of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of dependence.
This mode of production presupposes parcelling of the soil and scattering of the other means of production.
It is compatible only with a system of production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive bounds.
To perpetuate it would be, as Pecqueur rightly says, “to decree universal mediocrity".
At a certain stage of development, it brings forth the material agencies for its own dissolution.
From that moment new forces and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social organisation fetters them and keeps them down.
It comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review only those that have been epoch-making as methods of the primitive accumulation of capital.
The expropriation of the immediate producers was accomplished with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious.
That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers.
This expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the centralisation of capital.
The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it.
Centralisation of the means of production and socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible with their capitalist integument.
The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production, produces capitalist private property.
This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded on the labour of the proprietor.
But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation.
This does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him individual property based on the acquisition of the capitalist era: i.
In the former case, we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few usurpers; in the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of the people.
Political economy confuses on principle two very different kinds of private property, of which one rests on the producers’ own labour, the other on the employment of the labour of others.
It forgets that the latter not only is the direct antithesis of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only.
In Western Europe, the home of Political Economy, the process of primitive accumulation is more of less accomplished.
There the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision with the resistance of the producer, who, as owner of his own conditions of labour, employs that labour to enrich himself, instead of the capitalist.
The contradiction of these two diametrically opposed economic systems, manifests itself here practically in a struggle between them.
To this end, he proves how the development of the social productive power of labour, co-operation, division of labour, use of machinery on a large scale, &c.
In the interest of the so-called national wealth, he seeks for artificial means to ensure the poverty of the people.
Here his apologetic armor crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten touchwood.
Wakefield to have discovered, not anything new about the Colonies, but to have discovered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist production in the mother country.
He discovered that capital is not a thing, but a social relation between persons, established by the instrumentality of things.
Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 300 persons of the working class, men, women, and children.
Peel was left without a servant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river.
Peel who provided for everything except the export of English modes of production to Swan River!
For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wakefield, two preliminary remarks: We know that the means of production and subsistence, while they remain the property of the immediate producer, are not capital.
They become capital only under circumstances in which they serve at the same time as means of exploitation and subjection of the labourer.
Further: the splitting up of the means of production into the individual property of many independent labourers, working on their own account, he calls equal division of capital.
It is with the political economist as with the feudal jurist.
The latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the labels supplied by feudal law.
This is to some extent the case in new American settlements, where a passion for owning land prevents the existence of a class of labourers for hire.
The class of wage labourers, essential to these, is wanting.
How, then, in old Europe, was the expropriation of the labourer from his conditions of labour, i.
By a social contract of a quite original kind.
The division was the result of concert and combination.
But why, then, should “systematic colonisation” be called in to replace its opposite, spontaneous, unregulated colonisation?
His systematic colonisation is a mere pis aller, since he unfortunately has to do with free men, not with slaves.
“The first Spanish settlers in Saint Domingo did not obtain labourers from Spain.
But, without labourers, their capital must have perished, or at least, must soon have been diminished to that small amount which each individual could employ with his own hands.
We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production.
This is the secret both of the prosperity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice — opposition to the establishment of capital.
Whence then is to come the internal market for capital?
“No part of the population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting slaves and their employers who combine capital and labour in particular works.
Free Americans, who cultivate the soil, follow many other occupations.
Some portion of the furniture and tools which they use is commonly made by themselves.
They frequently build their own houses, and carry to market, at whatever distance, the produce of their own industry.
They are spinners and weavers; they make soap and candles, as well as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use.
In America the cultivation of land is often the secondary pursuit of a blacksmith, a miller or a shopkeeper.
The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this — that it not only constantly reproduces the wage-worker as wage-worker, but produces always, in proportion to the accumulation of capital, a relative surplus-population of wage-workers.
But in the colonies, this pretty fancy is torn asunder.
The absolute population here increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, because many labourers enter this world as ready-made adults, and yet the labour-market is always understocked.
The law of supply and demand of labour falls to pieces.
What becomes of the production of wage-labourers, supernumerary in proportion to the accumulation of capital?
The wage-worker of to-day is to-morrow an independent peasant, or artisan, working for himself.
He vanishes from the labour-market, but not into the workhouse.
Not only does the degree of exploitation of the wage labourer remain indecently low.
The wage labourer loses into the bargain, along with the relation of dependence, also the sentiment of dependence on the abstemious capitalist.
Wakefield pictures so doughtily, so eloquently, so pathetically.
The supply of wage labour, he complains, is neither constant, nor regular, nor sufficient.
“The supply of labour is always not only small but uncertain.
Few, even those whose lives are unusually long, can accumulate great masses of wealth.
It avails him nothing, if he is so cunning as to import from Europe, with his own capital, his own wage-workers.
The excellent capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his own good money, his own competitors!
No wonder Wakefield laments the absence of all dependence and of all sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers in the colonies.
In ancient civilised countries the labourer, though free, is by a law of Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this dependence must be created by artificial means.
What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this unfortunate state of things in the colonies?
A “barbarising tendency of dispersion” of producers and national wealth.
The parcelling-out of the means of production among innumerable owners, working on their own account, annihilates, along with the centralisation of capital, all the foundation of combined labour.
Every long-winded undertaking, extending over several years and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented from being carried out.
In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a moment, for the working class constitutes its living appurtenance, always in excess, always at disposal.
He was talking with some capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the immigrant wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment of “supernumerary” labourers.
After Wakefield has constructed the English capitalist agriculture and its “combined” labour with the scattered cultivation of American peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the reverse of the medal.
In what country, except North America and some new colonies, do the wages of free labour employed in agriculture much exceed a bare subsistence for the labourer?
Undoubtedly , farm-horses in England, being a valuable property, are better fed than English peasants.
How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colonies?
If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all the soil from public into private property, they would destroy certainly the root of the evil, but also — the colonies.
The trick is how to kill two birds with one stone.
Under these circumstances, tout sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles.
This is the great secret of “systematic colonisation.
It is very characteristic that the English Government for years practised this method of “primitive accumulation” prescribed by Mr.
Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies.
The fiasco was, of course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel’s Bank Act.
The stream of emigration was only diverted from the English colonies to the United States.
Meanwhile, the advance of capitalistic production in Europe, accompanied by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield’s recipe superfluous.
The great republic has, therefore, ceased to be the promised land for emigrant labourers.
Capitalistic production advances there with giant strides, even though the lowering of wages and the dependence of the wage-worker are yet far from being brought down to the normal European level.
However, we are not concerned here with the conditions of the colonies.
